\input texinfo @c -*-texinfo-*-

@c %**start of header
@setfilename libgdb.info
@settitle libGDB
@setchapternewpage odd
@c %**end of header

@ifinfo
This file documents the libGDB architecture, 1999 version.

Copyright 1999, Cygnus Solutions.

Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of
this manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice
are preserved on all copies.

@ignore
Permission is granted to process this file through TeX and print the
results, provided the printed document carries copying permission
notice identical to this one except for the removal of this paragraph
(this paragraph not being relevant to the printed manual).

@end ignore
Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided also that the
entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
permission notice identical to this one.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this manual
into another language, under the above conditions for modified versions.
@end ifinfo

@c  This title page illustrates only one of the
@c  two methods of forming a title page.

@titlepage
@title libGDB
@subtitle A library architecture for GDB
@author by Andrew Cagney, Cygnus Solutions

@c  The following two commands
@c  start the copyright page.
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
Copyright @copyright{} 1999, Cygnus Solutions

Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of
this manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice
are preserved on all copies.
@end titlepage


@c @node Top, Overview, , (dir)

@ifinfo
This document describes ...

This document applies to version ...
of the program named ...
@end ifinfo

@chapter Overview
@cindex overview
@cindex definitions
@heading Function and Purpose

This document provides an architectural overview of a proposed library
implementation of GDB.  The intended purpose of the library is to
facilitate the development of scripted and GUI interfaces based on the
GNU debugger GDB.

@heading Acknowledgments

Thanks goes to Jim Blandy, Jim Ingham, Fernando Nasser, Stan Shebs and
Elena Zannonoi for their significant contributions.


@chapter Review of previous work

@section DDD (and xgdb, xxgdb, mxgdb, ...)

Each of these debug GUI interfaces are implemented using an identical
technique.  GDB (or some other debugger) is started as a separate server
process, debug commands are sent to that process and all output is then
parsed.  Of these, DDD is probably the most successful.

Unfortunately this technique has several limitations:

@itemize
@item
it is very sensitive to changes in GDB's output
@item
performance is restricted by the speed of communication of between the
GUI and GDB
@item
it was difficult to keep the GUI consistent with the CLI
@end itemize

@section Insight (a.k.a. GDBtk)

The initial GDBtk implementation was very like DDD except that it was
embedded in the same process as the debugger.  Commands would be sent to
GDB and the resultant output would then be parsed.  As GDBtk evolved,
and bottle-necks were identified, more direct calls into GDB's internals
have been implemented (ex the assembler window).

Limitations of GDBtk can be identified:

@itemize
@item
the need to share an event loop with GDB
@*
With the introduction of an event loop and the asynchronous in GDB it
will finally becoming possible to address this issue.
@item
As with DDD GDBtk was often affected by changes to GDB's output
@*
The recently introduced gdb-file object should provide significant help.
@end itemize


@section EMACS/annotate

GDB can produce annotated text output through the @code{set annotate}
command.  In addition to the normal text, GDB includes numeric markers
that identify key output tokens (a line number, a file name).  EMACS
parses the annotations and makes use of that information.

The one key failing of this annotate mode is that the output fields are
identified numerically instead of symbolically as found things like XML.

While the annotate code is not being actively developed it does have a
significant installed base and consequently needs to be maintained.


@section libgdb 1.0

libgdb 1.0 was an interesting learning experience.  Much of that
experience is being transfered to libGDB.  Issues that libgdb didn't
address were:

@itemize
@item
an event model and a notify mechanism
@item
the assumption that reasonable performance could be achieved while
relying purely on a textual interface.
@end itemize

@chapter libGDB

This section describes the enhancements being made to GDB so that it can
facilitate the efficient integration of new interfaces such as scripting
languages and GUIs.


@section Overview

libGDB is not a single interface.  Rather it is a set of components that
make it possible to integrate GDB into a larger system.

That system might be the existing GDB-CLI, a scripting language such as
GUILE, or a true GUI.  Dependant on the functionality required, the
system would make use of one or more of the components that libGDB
provides.

For instance, one of the libGDB components is a target output stream.
All remote-target output being channeled through this.  The existing
GDB-CLI allows that output to flow through to the user's terminal while
a GUI would implement a target-console window and channel the
remote-target output through to that.

The components are:

@itemize
@item
Query with builder
@item
Event notify
@item
Control
@item
Output streams
@item
Event loop
@item
Start up
@end itemize

In the following section each of these interfaces is described.

Fundamental to a GDB library is the mechanism that allow the UI to
obtain symbolic information and also ensure that any information
obtained is synchronized with the current value on the target.

This is provided by request and notify (callback) mechanisms.


@section Expected client interaction

While GDB is good at combining binary data (obtained from the target)
with debug information (obtained from the object file) producing output
that represents the raw data in a symbolic form, GDB is useless when it
comes to managing those symbolic values in a more object oriented way.

Consequently, it is expected that non-trivial clients would use GDB as
part of a more sophisticated object framework.

Corresponding to each ``object'' that GDB can represent symbolically
would be a client object.  That client object would query GDB for
relevant symbolic information as needed.  Such a query might be
triggered by a user-interface request or, possibly, by libGDB notifying
the client that certain symbolic values are out-of-date.

For example, consider breakpoints.  A client might implement a
breakpoint object.  There being a one-to-one correspondence between
GDB's breakpoints and each instance of the breakpoint object.  When the
user (via the client's user-interface) requests that a breakpoint be
created the client would create its breakpoint object and then request
that GDB did the same.  When GDB detected that the state of a breakpoint
hand changed, it would notify the client of this.  The client could then
refresh its local breakpoint state.

Over the longer term, a generic implementation of such objects would
become available and that would be integrated into libGDB.


@section Interfaces

@subsection Query/builder

This is the most fundamental of the proposed changes to GDB.  Up until
now, code that implementing a query operation returned raw text
(possibly annotated).  As explained in the previous section this
operation is both un-reliable and inefficient. [I'd better add an
explanation].

In libGDB, all query operations are parameterized with a builder object
(ref something to do with builder and something to do with XML).
Internally, GDB describes the symbolic data using the more descriptive
builder interface where as previously it would have converted that
information into simple text.  The default builder (for the existing
CLI) would implement methods that continued to display that symbolic
data as straight text.

A given UI would construct a builder that meet its specific needs.  A
GUILE builder could construct a tagged list structure that would be
directly accessible from its interpreter.

For instance, details of a breakpoint are available using GDB's
@code{info breakpoint} command vis:

@example
(gdb) info breakpoint 1
Num Type           Disp Enb Address    What
1   breakpoint     keep y   0x0000003d in main at hello.c:3
        breakpoint already hit 1 time
@end example

Within libGDB the internal code that described the breakpoint would be
accessible.  In the GUILE case, that internal code would be called with
a GUILE builder and would construct an object like:

@example
(breakpoint
 ((number 1)
  (type "breakpoint")
  (disp "keep")
  (enabled "y")
  (addr "0x0000003d")
  (func "main")
  (file "hello.c" 3)))
@end example


@subsection Event notify

The next component is the notify mechanism.  When GDB determines that a
significant event has occurred (memory changed, breakpoint changed,
target started, target stopped) it advises the target using a notify
call.

For each ``object'' that GDB can represent symbolically, there is notify
mechanism that allows GDB to inform the UI that information has been
invalidated.  The exact mechanism used depends on the type of data
involved.

For instance, looking at the existing GDB CLI:

@example
(gdb) disable 1
(gdb) info breakpoint
Num Type           Disp Enb Address    What
1   breakpoint     keep n   0x0000003d in main at hello.c:3
        breakpoint already hit 1 time
@end example

After the command @code{disable 1} has been issued, GDB's internal state
of breakpoint has been changed.  Consequently, as part of updating the
breakpoint internal state, libGDB would notify the client that the
breakpoints state has changed.  The client could then query libGDB for
the new breakpoint state.

Note: @emph{libGDB is not re-entrant.  The client must ensure that it
has only one query outstanding at any time.}


@subsection Operators (anyone got a better name)

An operator manipulates the state of GDB or the target.

An operation is either synchronous or asynchronous.  A synchronous
operation completes synchronously with the client.  An asynchronous
operation, which involves execution (free running) by the target, has no
bounded completion time.

Note: @emph{A synchronous that operation communicates with the target
bounds the length of time required for the communication though the use
of timeouts.}

@subsubsection Synchronous operations

Such operations include changing the state of GDB and/or the target.
For instance, modifying, adding or deleting a breakpoints; Modifying the
value of a register on the target.

Such operations return a simple result indication. They do not return
more complex data.  For instance, the operator for creating a breakpoint
would return a success indication.  The event-notify mechanism would be
used to advice the client of the existence of the new breakpoint
identifier.

@subsubsection Asynchronous control

As a consequence of the ASYNC work, most control operations - step,
continue, run, stop - are asynchronous.  In addition, some of the less
obvious operations such as expression evaluation (this can involve an
inferior function call) are also considered asynchronous.

To correctly interact with libGDB, the client must implement:

@itemize
@item
code requesting an asynchronous operation
@item
code accepting asynchronous event-notification
@end itemize

For instance, a client requests libGDB to continue the program running
on the target.  The operation returns immediately. At some later stage
libGDB notifies the client that the program has halted and the client
can then query GDB for the stop status.

Note: @emph{The client is responsible for policy issues such as how to
handle failed asynchronous requests.  For instance, a GUI, in response
to the stop button being pressed may elect to leave the button depressed
until the target-stop notify event (or internal timeout) occurs or pop
the button immediately and then allow the user to re-attempt the stop
operation.}

Note: @emph{The mechanism for notifying the client of the final result
from an inferior function call have not been determined.  Asynchronous
inferior function calls are work-in-progress.  One possible mechanism
would be for GDB to notify the client of a result-handle and then allow
the client to query the value of that handle.}


@subsection Output streams

In addition to providing access to the target (via the query/notify
mechanism), GDB also has a number of out-of-band text streams:

@itemize @bullet
@item
output from the target (sim or remote)
@item
internal traces and logs
@item
CLI console output
@end itemize

Each of these text streams are implemented with corresponding stream
object.  A client can control a given stream by providing its own stream
implementation.


@subsection Event Loop

GDB, internally is event driven (well it is getting there).  The UI must
either:

@itemize @bullet
@item
bind itself to GDB's internal event-loop.
@*
Typical for command-line UIs.
@item
implement a custom event loop that incorporates the functionality
required by GDB.
@*
Typical for graphical UIs
@end itemize

The event loop interface is still being developed.


@subsection Start Up

Since the objective is to facilitate the addition of new GUI and
scripting interfaces integrated into GDB (rather than separate as with
DDD) a more clearly defined startup mechanism is required.

That sequence is still being defined.


@section Worked Examples

Below are several worked examples illustrating likely interactions
between a libGDB and a client.

@subsection Inferior Function Call

This example illustrates a possible sequence of interactions that could
occur between GDB and the client when the user, via the clients user
interface, requests the evaluation of an expression that contained a
function call.

@enumerate
@item
The client receives control from the event-loop (a request to evaluate
an expression by the user).
@item
The client requests that GDB evaluate an arbitrary expression using a
@emph{synchronous} expression evaluator.
@item
GDB rejects the request (as the expression includes an inferior function
call) returning a fail status to the client.
@item
The client requests that GDB evalue an arbitrary expression using the
asynchronous expression evaluator.
@item
GDB accepts the request.
@item
GDB determines that an inferior function call is required, starts the
target and notifies the client that the target is running.
@item
GDB returns control to the client.
@item
The client returns control to the event loop.
@item
GDB receives control from the event-loop - the target stopped.
@item
GDB notifies the client that the target stopped
@item
GDB notifies the client of the result of the expression. Say via a
handle.  The client requests that it be scheduled next.
@item
GDB returns control to the event-loop.
@item
The client receives control from the event-loop.
@item
The client queries GDB for the actual result of the expression.
@item
The client displays the result.
@item
The client returns control to the event-loop
@end enumerate


@subsection Breakpoints

In this example, it is assumed that the client is maintaining an
internal breakpoint structure that is separate to GDB.  That
client-structure is referred to when ever the client is annotating a
source code window with markers for the currently active breakpoints.

@subsubsection Set a new breakpoint

@enumerate
@item
The client receives the request for a breakpoint at function F.
@item
The client requests that GDB set a breakpoint at function F
@item
GDB performs the action; notifies client that a breakpoint has been
created; and then returns control to client.
@item
The client requests details of the newly created breakpoint from GDB and
updates local breakpoint table.
@end enumerate

@subsubsection Restart program with new executable

@enumerate
@item
The client receives the request to re-load the file.
@item
The client notifies GDB that the file should be re-loaded.
@item
GDB loads the updated executable and, in the process adjusts several
breakpoints.
@item
GDB notifies the client of the breakpoints that changed.
@item
The client refreshes its breakpoint database by requesting up-to-date
information from GDB.
@end enumerate

@subsection Global Variable

In this final example, the client is tracking the value of a global
variable.  It is assumed that in addition to an object responsible for
managing that variables value, the client also has a mechanism for
mapping address ranges onto variables.  GDB notifies the client of a
potential variable change by specifying the memory address and number of
bytes that were modified.

Note: @emph{Here one possible implementation is presented. Different
clients may elect to implement this differently.}

@enumerate
@item
client receives a request to display a variable's value
@item
client requests details of specified variable from GDB
@item
GDB returns variable details (value, memory location, stack or heap
based, ...)
@item
client creates an object to manage the value.  That object registers its
presence with the change notification system indicating its
address/size.
@end enumerate

The user than modifies the variable indirectly:

@enumerate
@item
client requests GDB to perform an operation that modifies the variable
mentioned above.
@item
GDB notifies client that a specific memory range has been changed.
@item
Client notifies variable object that it's value has been changed.
@item
Client's variable object requests GDB for an up-to-date value of that
variable.
@end enumerate


@chapter Implementation

This strategy outline the recommended strategy for implementing each of
the components.

@section Query

The set of possible requests, and their behavour will initially be based
on a subset of the existing CLI command set.  In particular the commands:

@itemize
@item
@code{show ...}
@item
@code{info ...}
@end itemize

would be used as a starting point.

Rather than clone those commands, the query methods would be implemented
by modifying the existing code base so that it ``builds'' each result.
The existing CLI would call the code with a simple text builder
(@file{cli-out.[hc]}?); GUILE would make the same call but with its own
complicated builder (@file{guile-out.[hc]}?).

As an example of the change required, the function @code{breakpoint_1()}
in @file{breakpoint.c} would be modified from:

@example
annotate_breakpoint (bs->breakpoint_at->number);
printf_filtered ("\nBreakpoint %d, ", bs->breakpoint_at->number);
@end example

to:

@example
annotate_breakpoint (bs->breakpoint_at->number);
ui_out_text (uiout, "\nBreakpoint ");
ui_out_field_int (uiout, "bkptno", bs->breakpoint_at->number);
ui_out_text (uiout, ", ");
@end example

A GUILE builder would construct the internal structure:

@example
(..... (bkptno 1) ...)
@end example


@section Notify

The notify mechanism is based on the hook system already provided to
GDBtk.  The mechanism would need to be formalized
(@file{gdb-hooks.[hc]}) (say).

The set of notify hooks would be expected to evolve over time as the
needs of the clients are better understood.


@section Operations

The control interface shall be based on GDB's existing set of @code{run}
/ @code{stop} et.al. commands.


@section ui-stream / gdb-file

The mechanism for capturing output directed to various streams (such as
output from the remote target) is the gdb_file.  Apart from a number of
minor refinements, that mechanism is already in place.

In the near term, gdb-file should be broken out of @file{utils.c} and
moved to a new file @file{ui-stream.[hc]} (say).


@section event-loop

The event loop is beyond the scope of this document.


@section Start up

Although the initialization mechanism used by optional client's is
still undefined, the below outlines one possible sequence:

@enumerate
@item
The alternative client is linked in with GDB. The top-level code
contained in @file{XXX-top.c}.  This file includes a standard
@var{__initialize_XXX} function.
@item
When GDB is started @var{--ui=NAME} is passed as an argument.  GDB saves
NAME in a global variable.
@item
Eventually control reaches @var{__initialize_XXX}.  That function checks
to see if it matches @var{NAME} and if it does, registers its custom
version of the main event loop.
@item
GDB continues initialization and then, eventually calls @var{XXX}'s
custom event loop.
@end enumerate


@c @node Concept Index,, Variables Index, Top
@c node-name, next, previous, up 
@c @unnumbered Concept Index

@c @printindex cp

@contents
@bye
