@settitle GNU AutoGen - The Automated Program Generator
@setchapternewpage off
@syncodeindex pg cp
@c %**end of header
@copying
This manual is for GNU AutoGen version 5.15, updated February 2012.

Copyright @copyright{} 1992-2012 by Bruce Korb.

@quotation
Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.2 or
any later version published by the Free Software Foundation; with no
Invariant Sections, no Front-Cover Texts, and no Back-Cover Texts.
@end quotation
@end copying

@ignore
EDIT THIS FILE WITH CAUTION  (agdoc.texi)

It has been AutoGen-ed  February 26, 2012 at 11:09:56 AM by AutoGen 5.15
From the definitions    /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/doc/ag-texi-13591.d/agdoc.def
and the template file   auto_gen.tpl

Plus bits and pieces gathered from all over the source/build
directories:
    /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/doc/auto_gen.tpl
    /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/opts.def
    /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/columns/invoke-columns.menu
    /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/getdefs/invoke-getdefs.menu
    /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/xml2ag/invoke-xml2ag.menu
    /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/doc/snprintfv.menu
    /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/columns/invoke-columns.texi
    /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/getdefs/invoke-getdefs.texi
    /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/xml2ag/invoke-xml2ag.texi
    /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/doc/snprintfv.texi
    /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/defParse-fsm.c
    /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/opts.h
    /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/invoke-autogen.menu
    /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/autoopts/libopts.texi
    /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/doc/autogen-intro.texi
    /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/invoke-autogen.texi
    /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/agShell.c
    /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/defDirect.c
    /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/expExtract.c
    /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/expFormat.c
    /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/expGperf.c
    /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/expGuile.c
    /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/expMake.c
    /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/expOutput.c
    /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/expPrint.c
    /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/expState.c
    /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/expString.c
    /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/fmemopen.c
    /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/funcCase.c
    /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/funcDef.c
    /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/funcEval.c
    /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/funcFor.c
    /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/funcIf.c
    /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/functions.c
    /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/schemedef.scm
    /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/doc/autogen-texi.txt

@end ignore

@dircategory GNU programming tools
@direntry
* AutoGen: (autogen).         The Automated Program Generator
@end direntry

@ifinfo
@ifnothtml
This file documents GNU AutoGen Version 5.15.

AutoGen copyright @copyright{} 1992-2012 Bruce Korb
AutoOpts copyright @copyright{} 1992-2012 Bruce Korb
snprintfv copyright @copyright{} 1999-2000 Gary V. Vaughan

AutoGen is free software: you can redistribute it and/or modify it
under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by the
Free Software Foundation, either version 3 of the License, or
(at your option) any later version.

AutoGen is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but
WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.
See the GNU General Public License for more details.

You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License along
with this program.  If not, see <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.

@ignore
Permission is granted to process this file through TeX and print the
results, provided the printed document carries copying permission
notice identical to this one except for the removal of this paragraph.
@end ignore
@end ifnothtml
@end ifinfo

@finalout
@titlepage
@title AutoGen - The Automated Program Generator
@subtitle For version 5.15, February 2012
@author Bruce Korb
@author @email{bkorb@@gnu.org}

@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
AutoGen copyright @copyright{} 1992-2012 Bruce Korb
@sp 2
This is the second edition of the GNU AutoGen documentation,
@sp 2
Published by Bruce Korb, 910 Redwood Dr., Santa Cruz, CA  95060

AutoGen is free software: you can redistribute it and/or modify it
under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by the
Free Software Foundation, either version 3 of the License, or
(at your option) any later version.

AutoGen is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but
WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.
See the GNU General Public License for more details.

You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License along
with this program.  If not, see <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.

@insertcopying
@end titlepage

@ifinfo

@node Top, Introduction, , (dir)
@top The Automated Program Generator
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up

This file documents AutoGen version 5.15.  It is a tool designed
for generating program files that contain repetitive text with varied
substitutions.  This document is very long because it is intended as a
reference document.  For a quick start example, @xref{Example Usage}.

The AutoGen distribution includes the basic generator engine and
several add-on libraries and programs.  Of the most general interest
would be Automated Option processing, @xref{AutoOpts}, which also
includes stand-alone support for configuration file parsing, @xref{Features}.
Please see the ``Add-on packages for AutoGen'' section for additional
programs and libraries associated with AutoGen.

This edition documents version 5.15, February 2012.


@menu
* Introduction::         AutoGen's Purpose
* Definitions File::     AutoGen Definitions File
* Template File::        AutoGen Template
* Augmenting AutoGen::   Augmenting AutoGen Features
* autogen Invocation::   Invoking AutoGen
* Installation::         Configuring and Installing
* AutoOpts::             Automated Option Processing
* Add-Ons::              Add-on packages for AutoGen
* Future::               Some ideas for the future.
* Copying This Manual::  Copying This Manual
* Concept Index::        General index
* Function Index::       Function index
@end menu

@end ifinfo

@ignore
* * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * *
@end ignore
@page
@node Introduction
@chapter Introduction
@cindex Introduction

AutoGen is a tool designed for generating program files that contain
repetitive text with varied substitutions.  Its goal is to simplify the
maintenance of programs that contain large amounts of repetitious text.
This is especially valuable if there are several blocks of such text
that must be kept synchronized in parallel tables.

An obvious example is the problem of maintaining the code required for
processing program options and configuration settings.  Processing options
requires a minimum of four different constructs be kept in proper order in
different places in your program.  You need at least:

@enumerate
@item
The flag character in the flag string,
@item
code to process the flag when it is encountered,
@item
a global state variable or two, and
@item
a line in the usage text.
@end enumerate

@noindent
You will need more things besides this if you choose to implement long option
names, configuration (rc/ini) file processing, environment variable settings
and keep all the documentation for these up to date.  This can be done
mechanically; with the proper templates and this program.  In fact, it has
already been done and AutoGen itself uses it@: @xref{AutoOpts}.  For a simple
example of Automated Option processing, @xref{Quick Start}.  For a full list
of the Automated Option features, @xref{Features}.  Be forewarned, though, the
feature list is ridiculously extensive.

@menu
* Generalities::         The Purpose of AutoGen
* Example Usage::        A Simple Example
* csh/zsh caveat::       csh/zsh caveat
* Testimonial::          A User's Perspective
@end menu

@c === SECTION MARKER

@node Generalities
@section The Purpose of AutoGen

The idea of this program is to have a text file, a template if
you will, that contains the general text of the desired output file.
That file includes substitution expressions and sections of text that are
replicated under the control of separate definition files.

@cindex design goals

AutoGen was designed with the following features:

@enumerate
@item
The definitions are completely separate from the template.  By completely
isolating the definitions from the template it greatly increases the
flexibility of the template implementation.  A secondary goal is that a
template user only needs to specify those data that are necessary to describe
his application of a template.

@item
Each datum in the definitions is named.  Thus, the definitions can be
rearranged, augmented and become obsolete without it being necessary to
go back and clean up older definition files.  Reduce incompatibilities!

@item
Every definition name defines an array of values, even when there is
only one entry.  These arrays of values are used to control the
replication of sections of the template.

@item
There are named collections of definitions.  They form a nested hierarchy.
Associated values are collected and associated with a group name.
These associated data are used collectively in sets of substitutions.

@item
The template has special markers to indicate where substitutions are
required, much like the @code{$@{VAR@}} construct in a shell @code{here doc}.
These markers are not fixed strings.  They are specified at the start of
each template.  Template designers know best what fits into their
syntax and can avoid marker conflicts.

We did this because it is burdensome and difficult to avoid conflicts
using either M4 tokenization or C preprocessor substitution rules.  It
also makes it easier to specify expressions that transform the value.
Of course, our expressions are less cryptic than the shell methods.

@item
These same markers are used, in conjunction with enclosed keywords, to
indicate sections of text that are to be skipped and for sections of
text that are to be repeated.  This is a major improvement over using C
preprocessing macros.  With the C preprocessor, you have no way of
selecting output text because it is an @i{un}varying, mechanical
substitution process.

@item
Finally, we supply methods for carefully controlling the output.
Sometimes, it is just simply easier and clearer to compute some text or
a value in one context when its application needs to be later.  So,
functions are available for saving text or values for later use.
@end enumerate

@c === SECTION MARKER

@node Example Usage
@section A Simple Example
@cindex example, simple AutoGen

This is just one simple example that shows a few basic features.
If you are interested, you also may run "make check" with the
@code{VERBOSE} environment variable set and see a number of other
examples in the @file{agen5/test/testdir} directory.

Assume you have an enumeration of names and you wish to associate some
string with each name.  Assume also, for the sake of this example,
that it is either too complex or too large to maintain easily by hand.
We will start by writing an abbreviated version of what the result
is supposed to be.  We will use that to construct our output templates.

@noindent
In a header file, @file{list.h}, you define the enumeration
and the global array containing the associated strings:

@example
typedef enum @{
        IDX_ALPHA,
        IDX_BETA,
        IDX_OMEGA @}  list_enum;

extern char const* az_name_list[ 3 ];
@end example

@noindent
Then you also have @file{list.c} that defines the actual strings:

@example
#include "list.h"
char const* az_name_list[] = @{
        "some alpha stuff",
        "more beta stuff",
        "final omega stuff" @};
@end example

@noindent
First, we will define the information that is unique for each enumeration
name/string pair.  This would be placed in a file named, @file{list.def},
for example.

@example
autogen definitions list;
list = @{ list_element = alpha;
         list_info    = "some alpha stuff"; @};
list = @{ list_info    = "more beta stuff";
         list_element = beta; @};
list = @{ list_element = omega;
         list_info    = "final omega stuff"; @};
@end example

The @code{autogen definitions list;} entry defines the file as an AutoGen
definition file that uses a template named @code{list}.  That is followed by
three @code{list} entries that define the associations between the
enumeration names and the strings.  The order of the differently named
elements inside of list is unimportant.  They are reversed inside of the
@code{beta} entry and the output is unaffected.

Now, to actually create the output, we need a template or two that can be
expanded into the files you want.  In this program, we use a single template
that is capable of multiple output files.  The definitions above refer to a
@file{list} template, so it would normally be named, @file{list.tpl}.

It looks something like this.
(For a full description, @xref{Template File}.)

@example
[+ AutoGen5 template h c +]
[+ CASE (suffix) +][+
   ==  h  +]
typedef enum @{[+
   FOR list "," +]
        IDX_[+ (string-upcase! (get "list_element")) +][+
   ENDFOR list +] @}  list_enum;

extern char const* az_name_list[ [+ (count "list") +] ];
[+

   ==  c  +]
#include "list.h"
char const* az_name_list[] = @{[+
  FOR list "," +]
        "[+list_info+]"[+
  ENDFOR list +] @};[+

ESAC +]
@end example

The @code{[+ AutoGen5 template h c +]} text tells AutoGen that this is
an AutoGen version 5 template file; that it is to be processed twice;
that the start macro marker is @code{[+}; and the end marker is
@code{+]}.  The template will be processed first with a suffix value of
@code{h} and then with @code{c}.  Normally, the suffix values are
appended to the @file{base-name} to create the output file name.

The @code{[+ == h +]} and @code{[+ == c +]} @code{CASE} selection clauses
select different text for the two different passes.  In this example,
the output is nearly disjoint and could have been put in two separate
templates.  However, sometimes there are common sections and this is
just an example.

The @code{[+FOR list "," +]} and @code{[+ ENDFOR list +]} clauses delimit
a block of text that will be repeated for every definition of @code{list}.
Inside of that block, the definition name-value pairs that
are members of each @code{list} are available for substitutions.

The remainder of the macros are expressions.  Some of these contain
special expression functions that are dependent on AutoGen named values;
others are simply Scheme expressions, the result of which will be
inserted into the output text.  Other expressions are names of AutoGen
values.  These values will be inserted into the output text.  For example,
@code{[+list_info+]} will result in the value associated with
the name @code{list_info} being inserted between the double quotes and
@code{(string-upcase! (get "list_element"))} will first "get" the value
associated with the name @code{list_element}, then change the case of
all the letters to upper case.  The result will be inserted into the
output document.

If you have compiled AutoGen, you can copy out the template and definitions
as described above and run @code{autogen list.def}.  This will produce
exactly the hypothesized desired output.

One more point, too.  Lets say you decided it was too much trouble to figure
out how to use AutoGen, so you created this enumeration and string list with
thousands of entries.  Now, requirements have changed and it has become
necessary to map a string containing the enumeration name into the enumeration
number.  With AutoGen, you just alter the template to emit the table of names.
It will be guaranteed to be in the correct order, missing none of the entries.
If you want to do that by hand, well, good luck.

@c === SECTION MARKER

@node csh/zsh caveat
@section csh/zsh caveat

AutoGen tries to use your normal shell so that you can supply shell code
in a manner you are accustomed to using.  If, however, you use csh or
zsh, you cannot do this.  Csh is sufficiently difficult to program that
it is unsupported.  Zsh, though largely programmable, also has some
anomalies that make it incompatible with AutoGen usage.  Therefore, when
invoking AutoGen from these environments, you must be certain to set the
SHELL environment variable to a Bourne-derived shell, e.g., sh, ksh or
bash.

Any shell you choose for your own scripts need to follow these basic
requirements:

@enumerate
@item
It handles @code{trap ":" $sig} without output to standard out.  This is done
when the server shell is first started.  If your shell does not handle this,
then it may be able to by loading functions from its start up files.
@item
At the beginning of each scriptlet, the command @code{\\cd $PWD}
is inserted.  This ensures that @code{cd} is not aliased to something
peculiar and each scriptlet starts life in the execution directory.
@item
At the end of each scriptlet, the command @code{echo mumble} is
appended.  The program you use as a shell must emit the single
argument @code{mumble} on a line by itself.
@end enumerate

@c === SECTION MARKER

@node Testimonial
@section A User's Perspective

@format
Alexandre wrote:
>
> I'd appreciate opinions from others about advantages/disadvantages of
> each of these macro packages.
@end format

I am using AutoGen in my pet project, and find one of its best points to
be that it separates the operational data from the implementation.

Indulge me for a few paragraphs, and all will be revealed:
In the manual, Bruce cites the example of maintaining command line flags
inside the source code; traditionally spreading usage information, flag
names, letters and processing across several functions (if not files).
Investing the time in writing a sort of boiler plate (a template in
AutoGen terminology) pays by moving all of the option details (usage,
flags names etc.) into a well structured table (a definition file if you
will),  so that adding a new command line option becomes a simple matter
of adding a set of details to the table.

So far so good!  Of course, now that there is a template, writing all of
that tedious optargs processing and usage functions is no longer an
issue.  Creating a table of the options needed for the new project and
running AutoGen generates all of the option processing code in C
automatically from just the tabular data.  AutoGen in fact already ships
with such a template... AutoOpts.

One final consequence of the good separation in the design of AutoGen is
that it is retargetable to a greater extent.  The
egcs/gcc/fixinc/inclhack.def can equally be used (with different
templates) to create a shell script (inclhack.sh) or a c program
(fixincl.c).

This is just the tip of the iceberg.  AutoGen is far more powerful than
these examples might indicate, and has many other varied uses.  I am
certain Bruce or I could supply you with many and varied examples, and I
would heartily recommend that you try it for your project and see for
yourself how it compares to m4.
@cindex m4

As an aside, I would be interested to see whether someone might be
persuaded to rationalise autoconf with AutoGen in place of m4...  Ben,
are you listening?  autoconf-3.0! `kay?  =)O|

@format
Sincerely,
        Gary V. Vaughan
@end format

@ignore
* * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * *
@end ignore
@page
@node Definitions File
@chapter Definitions File
@cindex definitions file
@cindex .def file

This chapter describes the syntax and semantics of the AutoGen
definition file.  In order to instantiate a template, you normally must
provide a definitions file that identifies itself and contains some
value definitions.  Consequently, we keep it very simple.  For
"advanced" users, there are preprocessing directives, sparse
arrays, named indexes and comments that may be used as well.

The definitions file is used to associate values with names.  Every
value is implicitly an array of values, even if there is only one value.
Values may be either simple strings or compound collections of
name-value pairs.  An array may not contain both simple and compound
members.  Fundamentally, it is as simple as:

@example
prog-name = "autogen";
flag = @{
    name      = templ_dirs;
    value     = L;
    descrip   = "Template search directory list";
@};
@end example

For purposes of commenting and controlling the processing of the
definitions, C-style comments and most C preprocessing directives are
honored.  The major exception is that the @code{#if} directive is
ignored, along with all following text through the matching
@code{#endif} directive.  The C preprocessor is not actually invoked, so
C macro substitution is @strong{not} performed.

@menu
* Identification::        The Identification Definition
* Definitions::           Named Definitions
* Index Assignments::     Assigning an Index to a Definition
* Dynamic Text::          Dynamic Text
* Directives::            Controlling What Gets Processed
* Predefines::            Pre-defined Names
* Comments::              Commenting Your Definitions
* Example::               What it all looks like.
* Full Syntax::           Finite State Machine Grammar
* Alternate Definition::  Alternate Definition Forms
@end menu

@c === SECTION MARKER

@node Identification
@section The Identification Definition
@cindex identification

The first definition in this file is used to identify it as a
AutoGen file.  It consists of the two keywords,
@samp{autogen} and @samp{definitions} followed by the default
template name and a terminating semi-colon (@code{;}).  That is:

@example
        AutoGen Definitions @var{template-name};
@end example

@noindent
Note that, other than the name @var{template-name}, the words
@samp{AutoGen} and @samp{Definitions} are searched for without case
sensitivity.  Most lookups in this program are case insensitive.

@noindent
Also, if the input contains more identification definitions,
they will be ignored.  This is done so that you may include
(@pxref{Directives}) other definition files without an identification
conflict.

@cindex template file

@noindent
AutoGen uses the name of the template to find the corresponding template
file.  It searches for the file in the following way, stopping when
it finds the file:

@enumerate
@item
It tries to open @file{./@var{template-name}}.  If it fails,
@item
it tries @file{./@var{template-name}.tpl}.
@item
It searches for either of these files in the directories listed in the
templ-dirs command line option.
@end enumerate

If AutoGen fails to find the template file in one of these places,
it prints an error message and exits.

@c === SECTION MARKER

@node Definitions
@section Named Definitions
@cindex definitions

A name is a sequence of characters beginning with an alphabetic character
(@code{a} through @code{z}) followed by zero or more alpha-numeric
characters and/or separator characters: hyphen (@code{-}), underscore
(@code{_}) or carat (@code{^}).  Names are case insensitive.

Any name may have multiple values associated with it.  Every name may be
considered a sparse array of one or more elements.  If there is more than
one value, the values my be accessed by indexing the value with
@code{[index]} or by iterating over them using the FOR (@pxref{FOR}) AutoGen
macro on it, as described in the next chapter.  Sparse arrays are specified
by specifying an index when defining an entry
(@pxref{Index Assignments,, Assigning an Index to a Definition}).

There are two kinds of definitions, @samp{simple} and @samp{compound}.
They are defined thus (@pxref{Full Syntax}):

@example
compound_name '=' '@{' definition-list '@}' ';'

simple-name[2] '=' string ';'

no^text^name ';'
@end example

@noindent
@code{simple-name} has the third index (index number 2) defined here.
@code{No^text^name} is a simple definition with a shorthand empty string
value.  The string values for definitions may be specified in any of
several formation rules.

@menu
* def-list::                 Definition List
* double-quote-string::      Double Quote String
* single-quote-string::      Single Quote String
* simple-string::            An Unquoted String
* shell-generated::          Shell Output String
* scheme-generated::         Scheme Result String
* here-string::              A Here String
* concat-string::            Concatenated Strings
@end menu

@cindex simple definitions
@cindex compound definitions

@node def-list
@subsection Definition List

@code{definition-list} is a list of definitions that may or may not
contain nested compound definitions.  Any such definitions may
@strong{only} be expanded within a @code{FOR} block iterating over the
containing compound definition.  @xref{FOR}.

Here is, again, the example definitions from the previous chapter,
with three additional name value pairs.  Two with an empty value
assigned (@var{first} and @var{last}), and a "global" @var{group_name}.

@example
autogen definitions list;
group_name = example;
list = @{ list_element = alpha;  first;
         list_info    = "some alpha stuff"; @};
list = @{ list_info    = "more beta stuff";
         list_element = beta; @};
list = @{ list_element = omega;  last;
         list_info    = "final omega stuff"; @};
@end example

@node double-quote-string
@subsection Double Quote String

@cindex string, double quote
The string follows the C-style escaping, using the backslash to quote
(escape) the following character(s).  Certain letters are translated to
various control codes (e.g. @code{\n}, @code{\f}, @code{\t}, etc.).
@code{x} introduces a two character hex code.  @code{0} (the digit zero)
introduces a one to three character octal code (note: an octal byte followed
by a digit must be represented with three octal digits, thus: @code{"\0001"}
yielding a NUL byte followed by the ASCII digit 1).  Any other character
following the backslash escape is simply inserted, without error, into the
string being formed.

Like ANSI "C", a series of these strings, possibly intermixed with
single quote strings, will be concatenated together.

@node single-quote-string
@subsection Single Quote String

@cindex string, single quote
This is similar to the shell single-quote string.  However, escapes
@code{\} are honored before another escape, single quotes @code{'}
and hash characters @code{#}.  This latter is done specifically
to disambiguate lines starting with a hash character inside
of a quoted string.  In other words,

@example
fumble = '
#endif
';
@end example

could be misinterpreted by the definitions scanner, whereas
this would not:

@example
fumble = '
\#endif
';
@end example

@*
As with the double quote string, a series of these, even intermixed
with double quote strings, will be concatenated together.

@node simple-string
@subsection An Unquoted String

A simple string that does not contain white space @i{may} be left
unquoted.  The string must not contain any of the characters special to
the definition text (i.e., @code{"}, @code{#}, @code{'}, @code{(},
@code{)}, @code{,}, @code{;}, @code{<}, @code{=}, @code{>}, @code{[},
@code{]}, @code{`}, @code{@{}, or @code{@}}).  This list is subject to
change, but it will never contain underscore (@code{_}), period
(@code{.}), slash (@code{/}), colon (@code{:}), hyphen (@code{-}) or
backslash (@code{\\}).  Basically, if the string looks like it is a
normal DOS or UNIX file or variable name, and it is not one of two
keywords (@samp{autogen} or @samp{definitions}) then it is OK to not
quote it, otherwise you should.

@node shell-generated
@subsection Shell Output String
@cindex shell-generated string

@cindex string, shell output
This is assembled according to the same rules as the double quote string,
except that there is no concatenation of strings and the resulting string is
written to a shell server process.  The definition takes on the value of
the output string.

NB@: The text is interpreted by a server shell.  There may be left over
state from previous server shell processing.  This scriptlet may also leave
state for subsequent processing.  However, a @code{cd} to the original
directory is always issued before the new command is issued.

@node scheme-generated
@subsection Scheme Result String

A scheme result string must begin with an open parenthesis @code{(}.
The scheme expression will be evaluated by Guile and the
value will be the result.  The AutoGen expression functions
are @strong{dis}abled at this stage, so do not use them.

@node here-string
@subsection A Here String
@cindex here-string

A @samp{here string} is formed in much the same way as a shell here doc.
It is denoted with two less than characters(@code{<<}) and, optionally, a
hyphen.  This is followed by optional horizontal white space and an
ending marker-identifier.  This marker must follow the syntax rules
for identifiers.  Unlike the shell version, however, you must not quote
this marker.

The resulting string will start with the first character on the next line
and continue up to but not including the newline that precedes the line that
begins with the marker token.  If a hyphen follows the less than characters,
then leading tabs will be stripped and the terminating marker will be
recognized even if preceded by tabs.  No backslash or any other kind of
processing is done on this string.  The characters are copied directly into
the result string.

Here are two examples:
@example
str1 = <<-  STR_END
        $quotes = " ' `
        STR_END;

str2 = <<   STR_END
        $quotes = " ' `
        STR_END;
STR_END;
@end example
The first string contains no new line characters.
The first character is the dollar sign, the last the back quote.

The second string contains one new line character.  The first character
is the tab character preceding the dollar sign.  The last character is
the semicolon after the @code{STR_END}.  That @code{STR_END} does not
end the string because it is not at the beginning of the line.  In the
preceding case, the leading tab was stripped.

@node concat-string
@subsection Concatenated Strings
@cindex concat-string

If single or double quote characters are used,
then you also have the option, a la ANSI-C syntax,
of implicitly concatenating a series of them together,
with intervening white space ignored.

NB@:  You @strong{cannot} use directives to alter the string
content.  That is,

@example
str = "fumble"
#ifdef LATER
      "stumble"
#endif
      ;
@end example

@noindent
will result in a syntax error.  The preprocessing directives are not
carried out by the C preprocessor.  However,

@example
str = '"fumble\n"
#ifdef LATER
"     stumble\n"
#endif
';
@end example

@noindent
@strong{Will} work.  It will enclose the @samp{#ifdef LATER}
and @samp{#endif} in the string.  But it may also wreak
havoc with the definition processing directives.  The hash
characters in the first column should be disambiguated with
an escape @code{\} or join them with previous lines:
@code{"fumble\n#ifdef LATER...}.

@c === SECTION MARKER

@node Index Assignments
@section Assigning an Index to a Definition
@cindex Definition Index

In AutoGen, every name is implicitly an array of values.
When assigning values, they are usually implicitly
assigned to the next highest slot.  They can also be
specified explicitly:

@example
mumble[9] = stumble;
mumble[0] = grumble;
@end example

@noindent
If, subsequently, you assign a value to @code{mumble} without an
index, its index will be @code{10}, not @code{1}.
If indexes are specified, they must not cause conflicts.

@code{#define}-d names may also be used for index values.
This is equivalent to the above:

@example
#define FIRST 0
#define LAST  9
mumble[LAST]  = stumble;
mumble[FIRST] = grumble;
@end example

All values in a range do @strong{not} have to be filled in.
If you leave gaps, then you will have a sparse array.  This
is fine (@pxref{FOR}).  You have your choice of iterating
over all the defined values, or iterating over a range
of slots.  This:

@example
[+ FOR mumble +][+ ENDFOR +]
@end example

@noindent
iterates over all and only the defined entries, whereas this:

@example
[+ FOR mumble (for-by 1) +][+ ENDFOR +]
@end example

@noindent
will iterate over all 10 "slots".  Your template will
likely have to contain something like this:

@example
[+ IF (exist? (sprintf "mumble[%d]" (for-index))) +]
@end example

@noindent
or else "mumble" will have to be a compound value that,
say, always contains a "grumble" value:

@example
[+ IF (exist? "grumble") +]
@end example

@c === SECTION MARKER

@node Dynamic Text
@section Dynamic Text
@cindex Dynamic Definition Text

There are several methods for including dynamic content inside a definitions
file.  Three of them are mentioned above (@ref{shell-generated} and
@pxref{scheme-generated}) in the discussion of string formation rules.
Another method uses the @code{#shell} processing directive.
It will be discussed in the next section (@pxref{Directives}).
Guile/Scheme may also be used to yield to create definitions.

When the Scheme expression is preceded by a backslash and single
quote, then the expression is expected to be an alist of
names and values that will be used to create AutoGen definitions.

@noindent
This method can be be used as follows:

@example
\'( (name  (value-expression))
    (name2 (another-expr))  )
@end example

@noindent
This is entirely equivalent to:

@example
name  = (value-expression);
name2 = (another-expr);
@end example

@noindent
Under the covers, the expression gets handed off to a Guile function
named @code{alist->autogen-def} in an expression that looks like this:

@example
(alist->autogen-def
    ( (name (value-expression))  (name2 (another-expr)) ) )
@end example

@node Directives
@section Controlling What Gets Processed
@cindex directives

Definition processing directives can @strong{only} be processed
if the '#' character is the first character on a line.  Also, if you
want a '#' as the first character of a line in one of your string
assignments, you should either escape it by preceding it with a
backslash @samp{\}, or by embedding it in the string as in @code{"\n#"}.

All of the normal C preprocessing directives are recognized, though
several are ignored.  There is also an additional @code{#shell} -
@code{#endshell} pair.  Another minor difference is that AutoGen
directives must have the hash character (@code{#}) in column 1.

The final tweak is that @code{#!} is treated as a comment line.
Using this feature, you can use:  @samp{#! /usr/local/bin/autogen}
as the first line of a definitions file, set the mode to executable
and "run" the definitions file as if it were a direct invocation of
AutoGen.  This was done for its hack value.

The ignored directives are:
@code{#ident}, @code{#let}, @code{#pragma}, and @code{#if}.
Note that when ignoring the @code{#if} directive, all intervening
text through its matching @code{#endif} is also ignored,
including the @code{#else} clause.

The AutoGen directives that affect the processing of
definitions are:

@table @code
@item #assert `shell-script` | (scheme-expr) | <anything else>
@cindex #assert
@cindex assert directive

@ignore
Generated from auto_gen.tpl line 537.
Extracted from /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/defDirect.c line 405.
@end ignore

If the @code{shell-script} or @code{scheme-expr} do not yield @code{true}
valued results, autogen will be aborted.  If @code{<anything else>} or
nothing at all is provided, then this directive is ignored.

When writing the shell script, remember this is on a preprocessing
line.  Multiple lines must be backslash continued and the result is a
single long line.  Separate multiple commands with semi-colons.

The result is @code{false} (and fails) if the result is empty, the
number zero, or a string that starts with the letters 'n' or 'f' ("no"
or "false").

@item #define name [ <text> ]
@cindex #define
@cindex define directive

@ignore
Generated from auto_gen.tpl line 537.
Extracted from /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/defDirect.c line 468.
@end ignore

Will add the name to the define list as if it were a DEFINE program
argument.  Its value will be the first non-whitespace token following
the name.  Quotes are @strong{not} processed.

After the definitions file has been processed, any remaining entries
in the define list will be added to the environment.

@item #elif
@cindex #elif
@cindex elif directive

@ignore
Generated from auto_gen.tpl line 537.
Extracted from /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/defDirect.c line 541.
@end ignore

This must follow an @code{#if}
otherwise it will generate an error.
It will be ignored.

@item #else
@cindex #else
@cindex else directive

@ignore
Generated from auto_gen.tpl line 537.
Extracted from /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/defDirect.c line 557.
@end ignore

This must follow an @code{#if}, @code{#ifdef} or @code{#ifndef}.
If it follows the @code{#if}, then it will be ignored.  Otherwise,
it will change the processing state to the reverse of what it was.

@item #endif
@cindex #endif
@cindex endif directive

@ignore
Generated from auto_gen.tpl line 537.
Extracted from /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/defDirect.c line 574.
@end ignore

This must follow an @code{#if}, @code{#ifdef} or @code{#ifndef}.
In all cases, this will resume normal processing of text.

@item #endmac
@cindex #endmac
@cindex endmac directive

@ignore
Generated from auto_gen.tpl line 537.
Extracted from /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/defDirect.c line 590.
@end ignore

This terminates a "macdef", but must not ever be encountered directly.

@item #endshell
@cindex #endshell
@cindex endshell directive

@ignore
Generated from auto_gen.tpl line 537.
Extracted from /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/defDirect.c line 604.
@end ignore

Ends the text processed by a command shell into autogen definitions.

@item #error [ <descriptive text> ]
@cindex #error
@cindex error directive

@ignore
Generated from auto_gen.tpl line 537.
Extracted from /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/defDirect.c line 623.
@end ignore

This directive will cause AutoGen to stop processing
and exit with a status of EXIT_FAILURE.


@item #if [ <ignored conditional expression> ]
@cindex #if
@cindex if directive

@ignore
Generated from auto_gen.tpl line 537.
Extracted from /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/defDirect.c line 647.
@end ignore

@code{#if} expressions are not analyzed.  @strong{Everything} from here
to the matching @code{#endif} is skipped.

@item #ifdef name-to-test
@cindex #ifdef
@cindex ifdef directive

@ignore
Generated from auto_gen.tpl line 537.
Extracted from /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/defDirect.c line 662.
@end ignore

The definitions that follow, up to the matching @code{#endif} will be
processed only if there is a corresponding @code{-Dname} command line
option or if a @code{#define} of that name has been previously encountered.

@item #ifndef name-to-test
@cindex #ifndef
@cindex ifndef directive

@ignore
Generated from auto_gen.tpl line 537.
Extracted from /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/defDirect.c line 681.
@end ignore

The definitions that follow, up to the matching @code{#endif} will be
processed only if there is @strong{not} a corresponding @code{-Dname}
command line option or there was a canceling @code{-Uname} option.

@item #include unadorned-file-name
@cindex #include
@cindex include directive

@ignore
Generated from auto_gen.tpl line 537.
Extracted from /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/defDirect.c line 700.
@end ignore

This directive will insert definitions from another file into
the current collection.  If the file name is adorned with
double quotes or angle brackets (as in a C program), then the
include is ignored.


@item #line
@cindex #line
@cindex line directive

@ignore
Generated from auto_gen.tpl line 537.
Extracted from /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/defDirect.c line 818.
@end ignore

Alters the current line number and/or file name.  You may wish to
use this directive if you extract definition source from other files.
@command{getdefs} uses this mechanism so AutoGen will report the correct
file and approximate line number of any errors found in extracted
definitions.

@item #macdef
@cindex #macdef
@cindex macdef directive

@ignore
Generated from auto_gen.tpl line 537.
Extracted from /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/defDirect.c line 862.
@end ignore

This is a new AT&T research preprocessing directive.  Basically, it is
a multi-line #define that may include other preprocessing directives.

@item #option opt-name [ <text> ]
@cindex #option
@cindex option directive

@ignore
Generated from auto_gen.tpl line 537.
Extracted from /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/defDirect.c line 875.
@end ignore

This directive will pass the option name and associated text to the
AutoOpts optionLoadLine routine (@pxref{libopts-optionLoadLine}).  The
option text may span multiple lines by continuing them with a backslash.
The backslash/newline pair will be replaced with two space characters.
This directive may be used to set a search path for locating template files
For example, this:

@example
#option templ-dirs $ENVVAR/dirname
@end example
@noindent
will direct autogen to use the @code{ENVVAR} environment variable to find
a directory named @code{dirname} that (may) contain templates.  Since these
directories are searched in most recently supplied first order, search
directories supplied in this way will be searched before any supplied on
the command line.


@item #shell
@cindex #shell
@cindex shell directive

@ignore
Generated from auto_gen.tpl line 537.
Extracted from /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/defDirect.c line 912.
@end ignore

Invokes @code{$SHELL} or @file{/bin/sh} on a script that should
generate AutoGen definitions.  It does this using the same server
process that handles the back-quoted @code{`} text.
@strong{CAUTION}@:  let not your @code{$SHELL} be @code{csh}.

@item #undef name-to-undefine
@cindex #undef
@cindex undef directive

@ignore
Generated from auto_gen.tpl line 537.
Extracted from /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/defDirect.c line 1010.
@end ignore

Will remove any entries from the define list
that match the undef name pattern.
@end table
@ignore
START == COMMENTS == DO NOT CHANGE THIS COMMENT or the surrounding 'ignore's
Extraction from autogen.texi
@end ignore

@ignore
Resume input from autogen.texi
@end ignore

@c === SECTION MARKER

@node Predefines
@section Pre-defined Names
@cindex predefines

When AutoGen starts, it tries to determine several names from the
operating environment and put them into environment variables for use in
both @code{#ifdef} tests in the definitions files and in shell scripts
with environment variable tests.  @code{__autogen__} is always defined.
For other names, AutoGen will first try to use the POSIX version of the
@code{sysinfo(2)} system call.  Failing that, it will try for the POSIX
@code{uname(2)} call.  If neither is available, then only
"@code{__autogen__}" will be inserted into the environment.
In all cases, the associated names are converted to lower case, surrounded
by doubled underscores and non-symbol characters are replaced with
underscores.

With Solaris on a sparc platform, @code{sysinfo(2)} is available.
The following strings are used:

@itemize @bullet
@item
@code{SI_SYSNAME} (e.g., "__sunos__")
@item
@code{SI_HOSTNAME} (e.g., "__ellen__")
@item
@code{SI_ARCHITECTURE} (e.g., "__sparc__")
@item
@code{SI_HW_PROVIDER} (e.g., "__sun_microsystems__")
@item
@code{SI_PLATFORM} (e.g., "__sun_ultra_5_10__")
@item
@code{SI_MACHINE} (e.g., "__sun4u__")
@end itemize

For Linux and other operating systems that only support the
@code{uname(2)} call, AutoGen will use these values:

@itemize @bullet
@item
@code{sysname} (e.g., "__linux__")
@item
@code{machine} (e.g., "__i586__")
@item
@code{nodename} (e.g., "__bach__")
@end itemize

By testing these pre-defines in my definitions, you can select
pieces of the definitions without resorting to writing shell
scripts that parse the output of @code{uname(1)}.  You can also
segregate real C code from autogen definitions by testing for
"@code{__autogen__}".

@example
#ifdef __bach__
  location = home;
#else
  location = work;
#endif
@end example

@c === SECTION MARKER

@node Comments
@section Commenting Your Definitions
@cindex comments

The definitions file may contain C and C++ style comments.

@example
/*
 *  This is a comment.  It continues for several lines and closes
 *  when the characters '*' and '/' appear together.
 */
// this comment is a single line comment
@end example

@c === SECTION MARKER

@node Example
@section What it all looks like.

@noindent
This is an extended example:

@example
autogen definitions @samp{template-name};
/*
 *  This is a comment that describes what these
 *  definitions are all about.
 */
global = "value for a global text definition.";

/*
 *  Include a standard set of definitions
 */
#include standards.def

a_block = @{
    a_field;
    a_subblock = @{
        sub_name  = first;
        sub_field = "sub value.";
    @};

#ifdef FEATURE
    a_subblock = @{
        sub_name  = second;
    @};
#endif

@};
@end example

@ignore
END   == COMMENTS == DO NOT CHANGE THIS COMMENT or the surrounding 'ignore's
Extraction from autogen.texi
@end ignore
@node    Full Syntax
@section Finite State Machine Grammar

The preprocessing directives and comments are not part of the grammar.  They
are handled by the scanner/lexer.  The following was extracted directly from
the generated defParse-fsm.c source file.  The "EVT:" is the token seen,
the "STATE:" is the current state and the entries in this table describe
the next state and the action to take.  Invalid transitions were removed
from the table.

@ignore
Extracted from $top_srcdir/agen5/defParse.y
@end ignore
@example
dp_trans_table[ DP_STATE_CT ][ DP_EVENT_CT ] = @{

  /* STATE 0:  DP_ST_INIT */
  @{ @{ DP_ST_NEED_DEF, NULL @},                       /* EVT:  AUTOGEN */
    @{ DP_ST_INVALID, dp_do_invalid @},               /* EVT:  DEFINITIONS */
    @{ DP_ST_INVALID, dp_do_invalid @},               /* EVT:  End-Of-File */
    @{ DP_ST_INVALID, dp_do_invalid @},               /* EVT:  VAR_NAME */
    @{ DP_ST_INVALID, dp_do_invalid @},               /* EVT:  OTHER_NAME */
    @{ DP_ST_INVALID, dp_do_invalid @},               /* EVT:  STRING */
    @{ DP_ST_INVALID, dp_do_invalid @},               /* EVT:  HERE_STRING */
    @{ DP_ST_INVALID, dp_do_invalid @},               /* EVT:  NUMBER */
    @{ DP_ST_INVALID, dp_do_invalid @},               /* EVT:  ; */
    @{ DP_ST_INVALID, dp_do_invalid @},               /* EVT:  = */
    @{ DP_ST_INVALID, dp_do_invalid @},               /* EVT:  , */
    @{ DP_ST_INVALID, dp_do_invalid @},               /* EVT:  @{ */
    @{ DP_ST_INVALID, dp_do_invalid @},               /* EVT:  @} */
    @{ DP_ST_INVALID, dp_do_invalid @},               /* EVT:  [ */
    @{ DP_ST_INVALID, dp_do_invalid @}                /* EVT:  ] */

  /* STATE 1:  DP_ST_NEED_DEF */
  @{ @{ DP_ST_INVALID, dp_do_invalid @},               /* EVT:  AUTOGEN */
    @{ DP_ST_NEED_TPL, NULL @},                       /* EVT:  DEFINITIONS */
    @{ DP_ST_INVALID, dp_do_invalid @},               /* EVT:  End-Of-File */
    @{ DP_ST_INVALID, dp_do_invalid @},               /* EVT:  VAR_NAME */
    @{ DP_ST_INVALID, dp_do_invalid @},               /* EVT:  OTHER_NAME */
    @{ DP_ST_INVALID, dp_do_invalid @},               /* EVT:  STRING */
    @{ DP_ST_INVALID, dp_do_invalid @},               /* EVT:  HERE_STRING */
    @{ DP_ST_INVALID, dp_do_invalid @},               /* EVT:  NUMBER */
    @{ DP_ST_INVALID, dp_do_invalid @},               /* EVT:  ; */
    @{ DP_ST_INVALID, dp_do_invalid @},               /* EVT:  = */
    @{ DP_ST_INVALID, dp_do_invalid @},               /* EVT:  , */
    @{ DP_ST_INVALID, dp_do_invalid @},               /* EVT:  @{ */
    @{ DP_ST_INVALID, dp_do_invalid @},               /* EVT:  @} */
    @{ DP_ST_INVALID, dp_do_invalid @},               /* EVT:  [ */
    @{ DP_ST_INVALID, dp_do_invalid @}                /* EVT:  ] */

  /* STATE 2:  DP_ST_NEED_TPL */
  @{ @{ DP_ST_INVALID, dp_do_invalid @},               /* EVT:  AUTOGEN */
    @{ DP_ST_INVALID, dp_do_invalid @},               /* EVT:  DEFINITIONS */
    @{ DP_ST_INVALID, dp_do_invalid @},               /* EVT:  End-Of-File */
    @{ DP_ST_NEED_SEMI, dp_do_tpl_name @},            /* EVT:  VAR_NAME */
    @{ DP_ST_NEED_SEMI, dp_do_tpl_name @},            /* EVT:  OTHER_NAME */
    @{ DP_ST_NEED_SEMI, dp_do_tpl_name @},            /* EVT:  STRING */
    @{ DP_ST_INVALID, dp_do_invalid @},               /* EVT:  HERE_STRING */
    @{ DP_ST_INVALID, dp_do_invalid @},               /* EVT:  NUMBER */
    @{ DP_ST_INVALID, dp_do_invalid @},               /* EVT:  ; */
    @{ DP_ST_INVALID, dp_do_invalid @},               /* EVT:  = */
    @{ DP_ST_INVALID, dp_do_invalid @},               /* EVT:  , */
    @{ DP_ST_INVALID, dp_do_invalid @},               /* EVT:  @{ */
    @{ DP_ST_INVALID, dp_do_invalid @},               /* EVT:  @} */
    @{ DP_ST_INVALID, dp_do_invalid @},               /* EVT:  [ */
    @{ DP_ST_INVALID, dp_do_invalid @}                /* EVT:  ] */

  /* STATE 3:  DP_ST_NEED_SEMI */
  @{ @{ DP_ST_INVALID, dp_do_invalid @},               /* EVT:  AUTOGEN */
    @{ DP_ST_INVALID, dp_do_invalid @},               /* EVT:  DEFINITIONS */
    @{ DP_ST_INVALID, dp_do_invalid @},               /* EVT:  End-Of-File */
    @{ DP_ST_INVALID, dp_do_invalid @},               /* EVT:  VAR_NAME */
    @{ DP_ST_INVALID, dp_do_invalid @},               /* EVT:  OTHER_NAME */
    @{ DP_ST_INVALID, dp_do_invalid @},               /* EVT:  STRING */
    @{ DP_ST_INVALID, dp_do_invalid @},               /* EVT:  HERE_STRING */
    @{ DP_ST_INVALID, dp_do_invalid @},               /* EVT:  NUMBER */
    @{ DP_ST_NEED_NAME, NULL @},                      /* EVT:  ; */
    @{ DP_ST_INVALID, dp_do_invalid @},               /* EVT:  = */
    @{ DP_ST_INVALID, dp_do_invalid @},               /* EVT:  , */
    @{ DP_ST_INVALID, dp_do_invalid @},               /* EVT:  @{ */
    @{ DP_ST_INVALID, dp_do_invalid @},               /* EVT:  @} */
    @{ DP_ST_INVALID, dp_do_invalid @},               /* EVT:  [ */
    @{ DP_ST_INVALID, dp_do_invalid @}                /* EVT:  ] */

  /* STATE 4:  DP_ST_NEED_NAME */
  @{ @{ DP_ST_NEED_DEF, NULL @},                       /* EVT:  AUTOGEN */
    @{ DP_ST_INVALID, dp_do_invalid @},               /* EVT:  DEFINITIONS */
    @{ DP_ST_DONE, dp_do_need_name_end @},            /* EVT:  End-Of-File */
    @{ DP_ST_HAVE_NAME, dp_do_need_name_var_name @},  /* EVT:  VAR_NAME */
    @{ DP_ST_INVALID, dp_do_invalid @},               /* EVT:  OTHER_NAME */
    @{ DP_ST_INVALID, dp_do_invalid @},               /* EVT:  STRING */
    @{ DP_ST_INVALID, dp_do_invalid @},               /* EVT:  HERE_STRING */
    @{ DP_ST_INVALID, dp_do_invalid @},               /* EVT:  NUMBER */
    @{ DP_ST_INVALID, dp_do_invalid @},               /* EVT:  ; */
    @{ DP_ST_INVALID, dp_do_invalid @},               /* EVT:  = */
    @{ DP_ST_INVALID, dp_do_invalid @},               /* EVT:  , */
    @{ DP_ST_INVALID, dp_do_invalid @},               /* EVT:  @{ */
    @{ DP_ST_HAVE_VALUE, dp_do_end_block @},          /* EVT:  @} */
    @{ DP_ST_INVALID, dp_do_invalid @},               /* EVT:  [ */
    @{ DP_ST_INVALID, dp_do_invalid @}                /* EVT:  ] */

  /* STATE 5:  DP_ST_HAVE_NAME */
  @{ @{ DP_ST_INVALID, dp_do_invalid @},               /* EVT:  AUTOGEN */
    @{ DP_ST_INVALID, dp_do_invalid @},               /* EVT:  DEFINITIONS */
    @{ DP_ST_INVALID, dp_do_invalid @},               /* EVT:  End-Of-File */
    @{ DP_ST_INVALID, dp_do_invalid @},               /* EVT:  VAR_NAME */
    @{ DP_ST_INVALID, dp_do_invalid @},               /* EVT:  OTHER_NAME */
    @{ DP_ST_INVALID, dp_do_invalid @},               /* EVT:  STRING */
    @{ DP_ST_INVALID, dp_do_invalid @},               /* EVT:  HERE_STRING */
    @{ DP_ST_INVALID, dp_do_invalid @},               /* EVT:  NUMBER */
    @{ DP_ST_NEED_NAME, dp_do_empty_val @},           /* EVT:  ; */
    @{ DP_ST_NEED_VALUE, dp_do_have_name_lit_eq @},   /* EVT:  = */
    @{ DP_ST_INVALID, dp_do_invalid @},               /* EVT:  , */
    @{ DP_ST_INVALID, dp_do_invalid @},               /* EVT:  @{ */
    @{ DP_ST_INVALID, dp_do_invalid @},               /* EVT:  @} */
    @{ DP_ST_NEED_IDX, NULL @},                       /* EVT:  [ */
    @{ DP_ST_INVALID, dp_do_invalid @}                /* EVT:  ] */

  /* STATE 6:  DP_ST_NEED_VALUE */
  @{ @{ DP_ST_INVALID, dp_do_invalid @},               /* EVT:  AUTOGEN */
    @{ DP_ST_INVALID, dp_do_invalid @},               /* EVT:  DEFINITIONS */
    @{ DP_ST_INVALID, dp_do_invalid @},               /* EVT:  End-Of-File */
    @{ DP_ST_HAVE_VALUE, dp_do_str_value @},          /* EVT:  VAR_NAME */
    @{ DP_ST_HAVE_VALUE, dp_do_str_value @},          /* EVT:  OTHER_NAME */
    @{ DP_ST_HAVE_VALUE, dp_do_str_value @},          /* EVT:  STRING */
    @{ DP_ST_HAVE_VALUE, dp_do_str_value @},          /* EVT:  HERE_STRING */
    @{ DP_ST_HAVE_VALUE, dp_do_str_value @},          /* EVT:  NUMBER */
    @{ DP_ST_INVALID, dp_do_invalid @},               /* EVT:  ; */
    @{ DP_ST_INVALID, dp_do_invalid @},               /* EVT:  = */
    @{ DP_ST_INVALID, dp_do_invalid @},               /* EVT:  , */
    @{ DP_ST_NEED_NAME, dp_do_start_block @},         /* EVT:  @{ */
    @{ DP_ST_INVALID, dp_do_invalid @},               /* EVT:  @} */
    @{ DP_ST_INVALID, dp_do_invalid @},               /* EVT:  [ */
    @{ DP_ST_INVALID, dp_do_invalid @}                /* EVT:  ] */

  /* STATE 7:  DP_ST_NEED_IDX */
  @{ @{ DP_ST_INVALID, dp_do_invalid @},               /* EVT:  AUTOGEN */
    @{ DP_ST_INVALID, dp_do_invalid @},               /* EVT:  DEFINITIONS */
    @{ DP_ST_INVALID, dp_do_invalid @},               /* EVT:  End-Of-File */
    @{ DP_ST_NEED_CBKT, dp_do_indexed_name @},        /* EVT:  VAR_NAME */
    @{ DP_ST_INVALID, dp_do_invalid @},               /* EVT:  OTHER_NAME */
    @{ DP_ST_INVALID, dp_do_invalid @},               /* EVT:  STRING */
    @{ DP_ST_INVALID, dp_do_invalid @},               /* EVT:  HERE_STRING */
    @{ DP_ST_NEED_CBKT, dp_do_indexed_name @},        /* EVT:  NUMBER */
    @{ DP_ST_INVALID, dp_do_invalid @},               /* EVT:  ; */
    @{ DP_ST_INVALID, dp_do_invalid @},               /* EVT:  = */
    @{ DP_ST_INVALID, dp_do_invalid @},               /* EVT:  , */
    @{ DP_ST_INVALID, dp_do_invalid @},               /* EVT:  @{ */
    @{ DP_ST_INVALID, dp_do_invalid @},               /* EVT:  @} */
    @{ DP_ST_INVALID, dp_do_invalid @},               /* EVT:  [ */
    @{ DP_ST_INVALID, dp_do_invalid @}                /* EVT:  ] */

  /* STATE 8:  DP_ST_NEED_CBKT */
  @{ @{ DP_ST_INVALID, dp_do_invalid @},               /* EVT:  AUTOGEN */
    @{ DP_ST_INVALID, dp_do_invalid @},               /* EVT:  DEFINITIONS */
    @{ DP_ST_INVALID, dp_do_invalid @},               /* EVT:  End-Of-File */
    @{ DP_ST_INVALID, dp_do_invalid @},               /* EVT:  VAR_NAME */
    @{ DP_ST_INVALID, dp_do_invalid @},               /* EVT:  OTHER_NAME */
    @{ DP_ST_INVALID, dp_do_invalid @},               /* EVT:  STRING */
    @{ DP_ST_INVALID, dp_do_invalid @},               /* EVT:  HERE_STRING */
    @{ DP_ST_INVALID, dp_do_invalid @},               /* EVT:  NUMBER */
    @{ DP_ST_INVALID, dp_do_invalid @},               /* EVT:  ; */
    @{ DP_ST_INVALID, dp_do_invalid @},               /* EVT:  = */
    @{ DP_ST_INVALID, dp_do_invalid @},               /* EVT:  , */
    @{ DP_ST_INVALID, dp_do_invalid @},               /* EVT:  @{ */
    @{ DP_ST_INVALID, dp_do_invalid @},               /* EVT:  @} */
    @{ DP_ST_INVALID, dp_do_invalid @},               /* EVT:  [ */
    @{ DP_ST_INDX_NAME, NULL @}                       /* EVT:  ] */

  /* STATE 9:  DP_ST_INDX_NAME */
  @{ @{ DP_ST_INVALID, dp_do_invalid @},               /* EVT:  AUTOGEN */
    @{ DP_ST_INVALID, dp_do_invalid @},               /* EVT:  DEFINITIONS */
    @{ DP_ST_INVALID, dp_do_invalid @},               /* EVT:  End-Of-File */
    @{ DP_ST_INVALID, dp_do_invalid @},               /* EVT:  VAR_NAME */
    @{ DP_ST_INVALID, dp_do_invalid @},               /* EVT:  OTHER_NAME */
    @{ DP_ST_INVALID, dp_do_invalid @},               /* EVT:  STRING */
    @{ DP_ST_INVALID, dp_do_invalid @},               /* EVT:  HERE_STRING */
    @{ DP_ST_INVALID, dp_do_invalid @},               /* EVT:  NUMBER */
    @{ DP_ST_NEED_NAME, dp_do_empty_val @},           /* EVT:  ; */
    @{ DP_ST_NEED_VALUE, NULL @},                     /* EVT:  = */
    @{ DP_ST_INVALID, dp_do_invalid @},               /* EVT:  , */
    @{ DP_ST_INVALID, dp_do_invalid @},               /* EVT:  @{ */
    @{ DP_ST_INVALID, dp_do_invalid @},               /* EVT:  @} */
    @{ DP_ST_INVALID, dp_do_invalid @},               /* EVT:  [ */
    @{ DP_ST_INVALID, dp_do_invalid @}                /* EVT:  ] */

  /* STATE 10:  DP_ST_HAVE_VALUE */
  @{ @{ DP_ST_INVALID, dp_do_invalid @},               /* EVT:  AUTOGEN */
    @{ DP_ST_INVALID, dp_do_invalid @},               /* EVT:  DEFINITIONS */
    @{ DP_ST_INVALID, dp_do_invalid @},               /* EVT:  End-Of-File */
    @{ DP_ST_INVALID, dp_do_invalid @},               /* EVT:  VAR_NAME */
    @{ DP_ST_INVALID, dp_do_invalid @},               /* EVT:  OTHER_NAME */
    @{ DP_ST_INVALID, dp_do_invalid @},               /* EVT:  STRING */
    @{ DP_ST_INVALID, dp_do_invalid @},               /* EVT:  HERE_STRING */
    @{ DP_ST_INVALID, dp_do_invalid @},               /* EVT:  NUMBER */
    @{ DP_ST_NEED_NAME, NULL @},                      /* EVT:  ; */
    @{ DP_ST_INVALID, dp_do_invalid @},               /* EVT:  = */
    @{ DP_ST_NEED_VALUE, dp_do_next_val @},           /* EVT:  , */
    @{ DP_ST_INVALID, dp_do_invalid @},               /* EVT:  @{ */
    @{ DP_ST_INVALID, dp_do_invalid @},               /* EVT:  @} */
    @{ DP_ST_INVALID, dp_do_invalid @},               /* EVT:  [ */
    @{ DP_ST_INVALID, dp_do_invalid @}                /* EVT:  ] */
@end example
@ignore
START == TEMPLATE == DO NOT CHANGE THIS COMMENT or the surrounding 'ignore's
Extraction from autogen.texi
@end ignore

@c === SECTION MARKER

@node Alternate Definition
@section Alternate Definition Forms
@cindex Alternate Definition

There are several methods for supplying data values for templates.

@table @samp
@item no definitions
It is entirely possible to write a template that does not depend upon
external definitions.  Such a template would likely have an unvarying
output, but be convenient nonetheless because of an external library
of either AutoGen or Scheme functions, or both.  This can be accommodated
by providing the @code{--override-tpl} and @code{--no-definitions}
options on the command line.  @xref{autogen Invocation}.

@item CGI
AutoGen behaves as a CGI server if the definitions input is from stdin
and the environment variable @code{REQUEST_METHOD} is defined
and set to either "GET" or "POST", @xref{AutoGen CGI}.  Obviously,
all the values are constrained to strings because there is no way
to represent nested values.

@item XML
AutoGen comes with a program named, @code{xml2ag}.  Its output can
either be redirected to a file for later use, or the program can
be used as an AutoGen wrapper.  @xref{xml2ag Invocation}.

The introductory template example (@pxref{Example Usage}) can be rewritten
in XML as follows:

@example
<EXAMPLE  template="list.tpl">
<LIST list_element="alpha"
      list_info="some alpha stuff"/>
<LIST list_info="more beta stuff"
      list_element="beta"/>
<LIST list_element="omega"
      list_info="final omega stuff"/>
</EXAMPLE>
@end example

A more XML-normal form might look like this:
@example
<EXAMPLE  template="list.tpl">
<LIST list_element="alpha">some alpha stuff</LIST>
<LIST list_element="beta" >more beta stuff</LIST>
<LIST list_element="omega">final omega stuff</LIST>
</EXAMPLE>
@end example
@noindent
but you would have to change the template @code{list_info} references
into @code{text} references.

@item standard AutoGen definitions
Of course.  :-)

@end table

@ignore
* * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * *
@end ignore
@page
@node Template File
@chapter Template File
@cindex template file
@cindex .tpl file

The AutoGen template file defines the content of the output text.
It is composed of two parts.  The first part consists of a pseudo
macro invocation and commentary.  It is followed by the template proper.

@cindex pseudo macro
@cindex macro, pseudo
This pseudo macro is special.  It is used to identify the file as a
AutoGen template file, fixing the starting and ending marks for
the macro invocations in the rest of the file, specifying the list
of suffixes to be generated by the template and, optionally, the
shell to use for processing shell commands embedded in the template.

AutoGen-ing a file consists of copying text from the template to the
output file until a start macro marker is found.  The text from the
start marker to the end marker constitutes the macro text.  AutoGen
macros may cause sections of the template to be skipped or processed
several times.  The process continues until the end of the template is
reached.  The process is repeated once for each suffix specified in the
pseudo macro.

This chapter describes the format of the AutoGen template macros
and the usage of the AutoGen native macros.  Users may augment
these by defining their own macros, @xref{DEFINE}.

@menu
* pseudo macro::       Format of the Pseudo Macro
* naming values::      Naming a value
* expression syntax::  Macro Expression Syntax
* AutoGen Functions::  AutoGen Scheme Functions
* Common Functions::   Common Scheme Functions
* native macros::      AutoGen Native Macros
* output controls::    Redirecting Output
@end menu

@c === SECTION MARKER

@node pseudo macro
@section Format of the Pseudo Macro
@cindex pseudo macro

The pseudo macro is used to tell AutoGen how to process a template.
It tells autogen:

@enumerate
@item
The start macro marker.  It consists of punctuation characters used to
demarcate the start of a macro.  It may be up to seven characters long and
must be the first non-whitespace characters in the file.

@noindent
It is generally a good idea to use some sort of opening
bracket in the starting macro and closing bracket in the ending
macro  (e.g. @code{@{}, @code{(}, @code{[}, or even @code{<}
in the starting macro).  It helps both visually and with editors
capable of finding a balancing parenthesis.

@item
That start marker must be immediately followed by the identifier strings
"AutoGen5" and then "template", though capitalization is not important.
@end enumerate

@noindent
The next several components may be intermingled:

@enumerate 3
@item
Zero, one or more suffix specifications tell AutoGen how many times to
process the template file.  No suffix specifications mean that it is to
be processed once and that the generated text is to be written to
@file{stdout}.  The current suffix for each pass can be determined with the
@code{(suffix)} scheme function (@pxref{SCM suffix}).

The suffix specification consists of a sequence of POSIX compliant file name
characters and, optionally, an equal sign and a file name formatting
specification.  That specification may be either an ordinary sequence of
file name characters with zero, one or two "%s" formatting sequences in it,
or else it may be a Scheme expression that, when evaluated, produces such a
string.  The Scheme result may not be empty.  The two string arguments
allowed for that string are the base name of the definition file, and the
current suffix (that being the text to the left of the equal sign).  (Note:
"POSIX compliant file name characters" consist of alphanumerics plus the
period (@code{.}), hyphen (@code{-}) and underscore (@code{_}) characters.)

If the suffix begins with one of these three latter characters and
a formatting string is not specified, then that character is presumed to
be the suffix separator.  Otherwise, without a specified format string,
a single period will separate the suffix from the base name in constructing
the output file name.

@item
Shell specification: to specify that the template was written expecting a
particular shell to run the shell commands.  By default, the shell used is the
autoconf-ed @code{CONFIG_SHELL}.  This will usually be @file{/bin/sh}.  The
shell is specified by a hash mark (@code{#}) followed by an exclamation mark
(@code{!}) followed by a full-path file name (e.g. @file{/usr/xpg4/bin/sh} on
Solaris):
@example
[= Autogen5 Template c
#!/usr/xpg4/bin/sh
=]
@end example

@item
Comments: blank lines, lines starting with a hash mark (@code{#}) and not
specifying a shell, and edit mode markers (text between pairs of @code{-*-}
strings) are all treated as comments.

@item
Some scheme expressions may be inserted in order to make configuration
changes before template processing begins.  ``@i{before template
processing begins}'' means that there is no current output file, no current
suffix and, basically, none of the AutoGen specific functions
(@pxref{AutoGen Functions}) may be invoked.

The scheme expression can also be used, for example, to save a pre-existing
output file for later text extraction (@pxref{SCM extract}).

@example
(shellf "mv -f %1$s.c %1$s.sav" (base-name))
@end example
@end enumerate

@noindent
After these must come the end macro marker:

@enumerate 6
@item
The punctuation characters used to demarcate the end of a macro.
Like the start marker, it must consist of seven or fewer punctuation
characters.
@end enumerate

The ending macro marker has a few constraints on its content.  Some of
them are just advisory, though.  There is no special check for advisory
restrictions.

@itemize @bullet
@item
It must not begin with a POSIX file name character (hyphen @code{-},
underscore @code{_} or period @code{.}), the backslash (@code{\}) or
open parenthesis (@code{(}).  These are used to identify a suffix
specification, indicate Scheme code and trim white space.

@item
If it begins with an equal sign, then it
must be separated from any suffix specification by white space.

@item
The closing marker may not begin with an open parenthesis, as that is used
to enclose a scheme expression.

@item
It cannot begin with a backslash, as that is used to indicate white
space trimming after the end macro mark.  If, in the body of the template,
you put the backslash character (@code{\}) before the end macro mark, then
any white space characters after the mark and through the newline character
are trimmed.

@item
It is also helpful to avoid using the comment marker (@code{#}).
It might be seen as a comment within the pseudo macro.

@item
You should avoid using any of the quote characters@:  double,
single or back-quote.  It won't confuse AutoGen, but it might well
confuse you and/or your editor.
@end itemize

As an example, assume we want to use @code{[+} and @code{+]} as the start
and end macro markers, and we wish to produce a @file{.c} and a @file{.h}
file, then the pseudo macro might look something like this:

@example
[+ AutoGen5 template -*- Mode: emacs-mode-of-choice -*-
h=chk-%s.h
c
# make sure we don't use csh:
(setenv "SHELL" "/bin/sh")  +]
@end example

The template proper starts after the pseudo-macro.  The starting
character is either the first non-whitespace character or the first
character after the newline that follows the end macro marker.

@c === SECTION MARKER

@node naming values
@section Naming a value
@cindex naming values

When an AutoGen value is specified in a template, it is specified by name.
The name may be a simple name, or a compound name of several components.
Since each named value in AutoGen is implicitly an array of one or more
values, each component may have an index associated with it.

@noindent
It looks like this:

@example
comp-name-1 . comp-name-2 [ 2 ]
@end example

Note that if there are multiple components to a name, each component
name is separated by a dot (@code{.}).  Indexes follow a component name,
enclosed in square brackets (@code{[} and @code{]}).  The index may be
either an integer or an integer-valued define name.  The first component
of the name is searched for in the current definition level.  If not
found, higher levels will be searched until either a value is found,
or there are no more definition levels.  Subsequent components of the
name must be found within the context of the newly-current definition
level.  Also, if the named value is prefixed by a dot (@code{.}),
@cindex .
then the value search is started in the current context only.
Backtracking
@cindex backtrack
into other definition levels is prevented.

If someone rewrites this, I'll incorporate it.  :-)

@c === SECTION MARKER

@node expression syntax
@section Macro Expression Syntax
@cindex expression syntax

AutoGen has two types of expressions:  full expressions and basic ones.
A full AutoGen expression can appear by itself, or as the argument
to certain AutoGen built-in macros:  CASE, IF, ELIF, INCLUDE,
INVOKE (explicit invocation, @pxref{INVOKE}), and WHILE.
If it appears by itself, the result is inserted into the output.
If it is an argument to one of these macros, the macro code
will act on it sensibly.

You are constrained to basic expressions only when passing
arguments to user defined macros, @xref{DEFINE}.

The syntax of a full AutoGen expression is:

@example
[[ <apply-code> ] <value-name> ] [ <basic-expr-1> [ <basic-expr-2> ]]
@end example

How the expression is evaluated depends upon the presence or absence
of the apply code and value name.  The "value name" is the name of
an AutoGen defined value, or not.  If it does not name such a value,
the expression result is generally the empty string.  All expressions
must contain either a @code{value-name} or a @code{basic-expr}.

@menu
* apply code::           Apply Code
* basic expression::     Basic Expression
@end menu

@node apply code
@subsection Apply Code

The "apply code" selected determines the method of evaluating the
expression.  There are five apply codes, including the non-use
of an apply code.

@table @samp
@item no apply code
This is the most common expression type.
Expressions of this sort come in three flavors:

@table @samp
@item <value-name>
The result is the value of @code{value-name}, if defined.
Otherwise it is the empty string.

@item <basic-expr>
The result of the basic expression is the result of the full expression,
@xref{basic expression}.

@item <value-name> <basic-expr>
If there is a defined value for @code{value-name}, then the @code{basic-expr}
is evaluated.  Otherwise, the result is the empty string.
@end table

@item % <value-name> <basic-expr>
If @code{value-name} is defined, use @code{basic-expr} as a format
string for sprintf.  Then, if the @code{basic-expr} is either a back-quoted
string or a parenthesized expression, then hand the result to the
appropriate interpreter for further evaluation.  Otherwise, for single
and double quote strings, the result is the result of the sprintf operation.
Naturally, if @code{value-name} is not defined, the result is the empty
string.

For example, assume that @code{fumble} had the string value, @code{stumble}:
@example
[+ % fumble `printf '%%x\\n' $%s` +]
@end example
This would cause the shell to evaluate "@code{printf '%x\n' $stumble}".
Assuming that the shell variable @code{stumble} had a numeric value,
the expression result would be that number, in hex.  Note the need
for doubled percent characters and backslashes.

@item ? <value-name> <basic-expr-1> <basic-expr-2>
Two @code{basic-expr}-s are required.  If the @code{value-name} is
defined, then the first @code{basic-expr-1} is evaluated, otherwise
@code{basic-expr-2} is.

@item - <value-name> <basic-expr>
Evaluate @code{basic-expr} only if @code{value-name} is @i{not} defined.

@item ?% <value-name> <basic-expr-1> <basic-expr-2>
This combines the functions of @samp{?} and @samp{%}.  If @code{value-name} is
defined, it behaves exactly like @samp{%}, above, using @code{basic-expr-1}.
If not defined, then @code{basic-expr-2} is evaluated.

For example, assume again that @code{fumble} had the string value, @code{stumble}:
@example
[+ ?% fumble `cat $%s` `pwd` +]
@end example
This would cause the shell to evaluate "@code{cat $stumble}".
If @code{fumble} were not defined, then the result would be the name
of our current directory.
@end table

@node basic expression
@subsection Basic Expression

A basic expression can have one of the following forms:

@table @samp
@item 'STRING'
A single quoted string.  Backslashes can be used to protect single
quotes (@code{'}), hash characters (@code{#}), or backslashes (@code{\})
in the string.  All other characters of STRING are output as-is when the
single quoted string is evaluated.  Backslashes are processed before the hash
character for consistency with the definition syntax.  It is needed there
to avoid preprocessing conflicts.

@item "STRING"
A double quoted string.  This is a cooked text string as in C,
except that they are not concatenated with adjacent strings.
Evaluating "@code{STRING}" will output STRING with all
backslash sequences interpreted.

@item `STRING`
A back quoted string.  When this expression is evaluated, STRING
is first interpreted as a cooked string (as in `"STRING"') and
evaluated as a shell expression by the AutoGen server shell.  This
expression is replaced by the @file{stdout} output of
the shell.

@item (STRING)
A parenthesized expression.  It will be passed to the Guile
interpreter for evaluation and replaced by the resulting value.
If there is a Scheme error in this expression, Guile 1.4 and Guile 1.6
will report the template line number where the error occurs.  Guile 1.7
has lost this capability.

Guile has the capability of creating and manipulating variables that
can be referenced later on in the template processing.  If you define
such a variable, it is invisible to AutoGen.  To reference its value,
you must use a Guile expression.  For example,
@example
[+ (define my-var "some-string-value") +]
@end example
can have that string inserted later, but only as in:
@example
[+ (. my-var) +]
@end example

Additionally, other than in the @code{%} and @code{?%} expressions, the
Guile expressions may be introduced with the Guile comment character
(@code{;}) and you may put a series of Guile expressions within a single
macro.  They will be implicitly evaluated as if they were arguments
to the @code{(begin ...)} expression.  The result will be the
result of the last Guile expression evaluated.
@end table

@ignore
END   == TEMPLATE == DO NOT CHANGE THIS COMMENT or the surrounding 'ignore's
Extraction from autogen.texi
@end ignore
@ignore

* * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * *

@end ignore
@page
@node AutoGen Functions
@section AutoGen Scheme Functions

AutoGen uses Guile to interpret Scheme expressions within AutoGen
macros.  All of the normal Guile functions are available, plus several
extensions (@pxref{Common Functions}) have been added to
augment the repertoire of string manipulation functions and
manage the state of AutoGen processing.

This section describes those functions that are specific to AutoGen.
Please take note that these AutoGen specific functions are not loaded
and thus not made available until after the command line options have
been processed and the AutoGen definitions have been loaded.  They may,
of course, be used in Scheme functions that get defined at those times,
but they cannot be invoked.

@menu
* SCM ag-fprintf::         @file{ag-fprintf} - format to autogen stream
* SCM ag-function?::       @file{ag-function?} - test for function
* SCM base-name::          @file{base-name} - base output name
* SCM chdir::              @file{chdir} - Change current directory
* SCM count::              @file{count} - definition count
* SCM def-file::           @file{def-file} - definitions file name
* SCM def-file-line::      @file{def-file-line} - get a definition file+line number
* SCM dne::                @file{dne} - "Do Not Edit" warning
* SCM emit::               @file{emit} - emit the text for each argument
* SCM emit-string-table::  @file{emit-string-table} - output a string table
* SCM error::              @file{error} - display message and exit
* SCM exist?::             @file{exist?} - test for value name
* SCM find-file::          @file{find-file} - locate a file in the search path
* SCM first-for?::         @file{first-for?} - detect first iteration
* SCM for-by::             @file{for-by} - set iteration step
* SCM for-from::           @file{for-from} - set initial index
* SCM for-index::          @file{for-index} - get current loop index
* SCM for-sep::            @file{for-sep} - set loop separation string
* SCM for-to::             @file{for-to} - set ending index
* SCM get::                @file{get} - get named value
* SCM get-c-name::         @file{get-c-name} - get named value, mapped to C name syntax
* SCM get-down-name::      @file{get-down-name} - get lower cased named value, mapped to C name syntax
* SCM get-up-name::        @file{get-up-name} - get upper cased named value, mapped to C name syntax
* SCM high-lim::           @file{high-lim} - get highest value index
* SCM last-for?::          @file{last-for?} - detect last iteration
* SCM len::                @file{len} - get count of values
* SCM low-lim::            @file{low-lim} - get lowest value index
* SCM make-header-guard::  @file{make-header-guard} - make self-inclusion guard
* SCM make-tmp-dir::       @file{make-tmp-dir} - create a temporary directory
* SCM match-value?::       @file{match-value?} - test for matching value
* SCM out-delete::         @file{out-delete} - delete current output file
* SCM out-depth::          @file{out-depth} - output file stack depth
* SCM out-emit-suspended:: @file{out-emit-suspended} - emit the text of suspended output
* SCM out-line::           @file{out-line} - output file line number
* SCM out-move::           @file{out-move} - change name of output file
* SCM out-name::           @file{out-name} - current output file name
* SCM out-pop::            @file{out-pop} - close current output file
* SCM out-push-add::       @file{out-push-add} - append output to file
* SCM out-push-new::       @file{out-push-new} - purge and create output file
* SCM out-resume::         @file{out-resume} - resume suspended output file
* SCM out-suspend::        @file{out-suspend} - suspend current output file
* SCM out-switch::         @file{out-switch} - close and create new output
* SCM output-file-next-line:: @file{output-file-next-line} - print the file name and next line number
* SCM set-option::         @file{set-option} - Set a command line option
* SCM set-writable::       @file{set-writable} - Make the output file be writable
* SCM stack::              @file{stack} - make list of AutoGen values
* SCM stack-join::         @file{stack-join} - stack values then join them
* SCM suffix::             @file{suffix} - get the current suffix
* SCM tpl-file::           @file{tpl-file} - get the template file name
* SCM tpl-file-line::      @file{tpl-file-line} - get the template file+line number
* SCM tpl-file-next-line:: @file{tpl-file-next-line} - get the template file plus next line number
* SCM autogen-version::     @file{autogen-version} - ``5.15''
* SCM c-file-line-fmt::     format file info as, ``@code{#line nn "file"}''
@end menu


@node SCM ag-fprintf
@subsection @file{ag-fprintf} - format to autogen stream
@findex ag-fprintf

@ignore
Generated from auto_gen.tpl line 537.
Extracted from /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/expOutput.c line 454.
@end ignore

Usage:  (ag-fprintf ag-diversion format [ format-arg ... ])
@*
Format a string using arguments from the alist.
Write to a specified AutoGen diversion.
That may be either a specified suspended output stream
(@pxref{SCM out-suspend}) or an index into the output stack
(@pxref{SCM out-push-new}).  @code{(ag-fprintf 0 ...)} is
equivalent to @code{(emit (sprintf ...))}, and
@code{(ag-fprintf 1 ...)} sends output to the most recently
suspended output stream.

Arguments:
@*
ag-diversion - AutoGen diversion name or number
@*
format - formatting string
@*
format-arg - Optional - list of arguments to formatting string

@node SCM ag-function?
@subsection @file{ag-function?} - test for function
@findex ag-function?

@ignore
Generated from auto_gen.tpl line 537.
Extracted from /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/expState.c line 379.
@end ignore

Usage:  (ag-function? ag-name)
@*
return SCM_BOOL_T if a specified name is a user-defined AutoGen
macro, otherwise return SCM_BOOL_F.

Arguments:
@*
ag-name - name of AutoGen macro

@node SCM base-name
@subsection @file{base-name} - base output name
@findex base-name

@ignore
Generated from auto_gen.tpl line 537.
Extracted from /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/expState.c line 213.
@end ignore

Usage:  (base-name)
@*
Returns a string containing the base name of the output file(s).
Generally, this is also the base name of the definitions file.

This Scheme function takes no arguments.

@node SCM chdir
@subsection @file{chdir} - Change current directory
@findex chdir

@ignore
Generated from auto_gen.tpl line 537.
Extracted from /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/agShell.c line 26.
@end ignore

Usage:  (chdir dir)
@*
Sets the current directory for AutoGen.  Shell commands will run
from this directory as well.  This is a wrapper around the Guile
native function.  It returns its directory name argument and
fails the program on failure.

Arguments:
@*
dir - new directory name

@node SCM count
@subsection @file{count} - definition count
@findex count

@ignore
Generated from auto_gen.tpl line 537.
Extracted from /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/expState.c line 308.
@end ignore

Usage:  (count ag-name)
@*
Count the number of entries for a definition.
The input argument must be a string containing the name
of the AutoGen values to be counted.  If there is no
value associated with the name, the result is an SCM
immediate integer value of zero.

Arguments:
@*
ag-name - name of AutoGen value

@node SCM def-file
@subsection @file{def-file} - definitions file name
@findex def-file

@ignore
Generated from auto_gen.tpl line 537.
Extracted from /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/expState.c line 329.
@end ignore

Usage:  (def-file)
@*
Get the name of the definitions file.
Returns the name of the source file containing the AutoGen
definitions.

This Scheme function takes no arguments.

@node SCM def-file-line
@subsection @file{def-file-line} - get a definition file+line number
@findex def-file-line

@ignore
Generated from auto_gen.tpl line 537.
Extracted from /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/expState.c line 754.
@end ignore

Usage:  (def-file-line ag-name [ msg-fmt ])
@*
Returns the file and line number of a AutoGen defined value, using
either the default format, "from %s line %d", or else the format you
supply.  For example, if you want to insert a "C" language file-line
directive, you would supply the format "# %2$d \"%1$s\"", but that
is also already supplied with the scheme variable
@xref{SCM c-file-line-fmt}.  You may use it thus:

@example
(def-file-line "ag-def-name" c-file-line-fmt)
@end example

It is also safe to use the formatting string, "%2$d".  AutoGen uses
an argument vector version of printf: @xref{snprintfv}.

Arguments:
@*
ag-name - name of AutoGen value
@*
msg-fmt - Optional - formatting for line message

@node SCM dne
@subsection @file{dne} - "Do Not Edit" warning
@findex dne

@ignore
Generated from auto_gen.tpl line 537.
Extracted from /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/expFormat.c line 33.
@end ignore

Usage:  (dne prefix [ first_prefix ] [ optpfx ])
@*
Generate a "DO NOT EDIT" or "EDIT WITH CARE" warning string.
Which depends on whether or not the @code{--writable} command line
option was set.

The first argument may be an option:  -d

This will suppress the variable text (date and version information).
If specified, then the "prefix" and "first" arguments are shifted
to the next arguments.

The first argument is a per-line string prefix.  The optional second
argument is a prefix for the first-line and, in read-only mode, activates
the editor hints.
@*
@example
-*- buffer-read-only: t -*- vi: set ro:
@end example
@noindent
The warning string also includes information about the template used
to construct the file and the definitions used in its instantiation.

The optional third argument is used when the first argument is actually an
invocation option and the prefix arguments get shifted.  The first
argument must be, specifically, "@code{-d}".  That is used to signify that
the date stamp should not be inserted into the output.

Arguments:
@*
prefix - string for starting each output line
@*
first_prefix - Optional - for the first output line
@*
optpfx - Optional - shifted prefix

@node SCM emit
@subsection @file{emit} - emit the text for each argument
@findex emit

@ignore
Generated from auto_gen.tpl line 537.
Extracted from /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/funcEval.c line 317.
@end ignore

Usage:  (emit alist ...)
@*
Walk the tree of arguments, displaying the values of displayable
SCM types.  EXCEPTION: if the first argument is a number, then
that number is used to index the output stack.  "0" is the default,
the current output.

Arguments:
@*
alist - list of arguments to stringify and emit

@node SCM emit-string-table
@subsection @file{emit-string-table} - output a string table
@findex emit-string-table

@ignore
Generated from auto_gen.tpl line 537.
Extracted from /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/schemedef.scm line 279.
@end ignore

Usage:  (emit-string-table st-name)
@*
Emit into the current output stream a
@code{static char const} array named @code{st-name}
that will have @code{NUL} bytes between each inserted string.

Arguments:
@*
st-name - the name of the array of characters

@node SCM error
@subsection @file{error} - display message and exit
@findex error

@ignore
Generated from auto_gen.tpl line 537.
Extracted from /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/expFormat.c line 160.
@end ignore

Usage:  (error message)
@*
The argument is a string that printed out as part of an error
message.  The message is formed from the formatting string:

@example
DEFINITIONS ERROR in %s line %d for %s:  %s\n
@end example

The first three arguments to this format are provided by the
routine and are:  The name of the template file, the line within
the template where the error was found, and the current output
file name.

After displaying the message, the current output file is removed
and autogen exits with the EXIT_FAILURE error code.  IF, however,
the argument begins with the number 0 (zero), or the string is the
empty string, then processing continues with the next suffix.

Arguments:
@*
message - message to display before exiting

@node SCM exist?
@subsection @file{exist?} - test for value name
@findex exist?

@ignore
Generated from auto_gen.tpl line 537.
Extracted from /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/expState.c line 344.
@end ignore

Usage:  (exist? ag-name)
@*
return SCM_BOOL_T iff a specified name has an AutoGen value.
The name may include indexes and/or member names.
All but the last member name must be an aggregate definition.
For example:
@example
(exist? "foo[3].bar.baz")
@end example
will yield true if all of the following is true:
@*
There is a member value of either group or string type
named @code{baz} for some group value @code{bar} that
is a member of the @code{foo} group with index @code{3}.
There may be multiple entries of @code{bar} within
@code{foo}, only one needs to contain a value for @code{baz}.

Arguments:
@*
ag-name - name of AutoGen value

@node SCM find-file
@subsection @file{find-file} - locate a file in the search path
@findex find-file

@ignore
Generated from auto_gen.tpl line 537.
Extracted from /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/expExtract.c line 313.
@end ignore

Usage:  (find-file file-name [ suffix ])
@*
AutoGen has a search path that it uses to locate template and definition
files.  This function will search the same list for @file{file-name}, both
with and without the @file{.suffix}, if provided.

Arguments:
@*
file-name - name of file with text
@*
suffix - Optional - file suffix to try, too

@node SCM first-for?
@subsection @file{first-for?} - detect first iteration
@findex first-for?

@ignore
Generated from auto_gen.tpl line 537.
Extracted from /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/funcFor.c line 51.
@end ignore

Usage:  (first-for? [ for_var ])
@*
Returns SCM_BOOL_T if the named FOR loop (or, if not named, the
current innermost loop) is on the first pass through the data.
Outside of any FOR loop, it returns SCM_UNDEFINED.
@xref{FOR}.

Arguments:
@*
for_var - Optional - which for loop

@node SCM for-by
@subsection @file{for-by} - set iteration step
@findex for-by

@ignore
Generated from auto_gen.tpl line 537.
Extracted from /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/funcFor.c line 202.
@end ignore

Usage:  (for-by by)
@*
This function records the "step by" information
for an AutoGen FOR function.
Outside of the FOR macro itself, this function will emit an error.
@xref{FOR}.

Arguments:
@*
by - the iteration increment for the AutoGen FOR macro

@node SCM for-from
@subsection @file{for-from} - set initial index
@findex for-from

@ignore
Generated from auto_gen.tpl line 537.
Extracted from /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/funcFor.c line 162.
@end ignore

Usage:  (for-from from)
@*
This function records the initial index information
for an AutoGen FOR function.
Outside of the FOR macro itself, this function will emit an error.
@xref{FOR}.

Arguments:
@*
from - the initial index for the AutoGen FOR macro

@node SCM for-index
@subsection @file{for-index} - get current loop index
@findex for-index

@ignore
Generated from auto_gen.tpl line 537.
Extracted from /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/funcFor.c line 125.
@end ignore

Usage:  (for-index [ for_var ])
@*
Returns the current index for the named FOR loop.
If not named, then the index for the innermost loop.
Outside of any FOR loop, it returns SCM_UNDEFINED.
@xref{FOR}.

Arguments:
@*
for_var - Optional - which for loop

@node SCM for-sep
@subsection @file{for-sep} - set loop separation string
@findex for-sep

@ignore
Generated from auto_gen.tpl line 537.
Extracted from /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/funcFor.c line 222.
@end ignore

Usage:  (for-sep separator)
@*
This function records the separation string that is to be inserted
between each iteration of an AutoGen FOR function.  This is often
nothing more than a comma.
Outside of the FOR macro itself, this function will emit an error.

Arguments:
@*
separator - the text to insert between the output of
each FOR iteration

@node SCM for-to
@subsection @file{for-to} - set ending index
@findex for-to

@ignore
Generated from auto_gen.tpl line 537.
Extracted from /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/funcFor.c line 182.
@end ignore

Usage:  (for-to to)
@*
This function records the terminating value information
for an AutoGen FOR function.
Outside of the FOR macro itself, this function will emit an error.
@xref{FOR}.

Arguments:
@*
to - the final index for the AutoGen FOR macro

@node SCM get
@subsection @file{get} - get named value
@findex get

@ignore
Generated from auto_gen.tpl line 537.
Extracted from /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/expState.c line 434.
@end ignore

Usage:  (get ag-name [ alt-val ])
@*
Get the first string value associated with the name.
It will either return the associated string value (if
the name resolves), the alternate value (if one is provided),
or else the empty string.

Arguments:
@*
ag-name - name of AutoGen value
@*
alt-val - Optional - value if not present

@node SCM get-c-name
@subsection @file{get-c-name} - get named value, mapped to C name syntax
@findex get-c-name

@ignore
Generated from auto_gen.tpl line 537.
Extracted from /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/expState.c line 466.
@end ignore

Usage:  (get-c-name ag-name)
@*
Get the first string value associated with the name.  It will either
return the associated string value (if the name resolves), the alternate
value (if one is provided), or else the empty string.  The result is
passed through "string->c-name!".

Arguments:
@*
ag-name - name of AutoGen value

@node SCM get-down-name
@subsection @file{get-down-name} - get lower cased named value, mapped to C name syntax
@findex get-down-name

@ignore
Generated from auto_gen.tpl line 537.
Extracted from /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/expState.c line 507.
@end ignore

Usage:  (get-down-name ag-name)
@*
Get the first string value associated with the name.  It will either
return the associated string value (if the name resolves), the alternate
value (if one is provided), or else the empty string.  The result is
passed through "string->c-name!" and "string->down-case!".

Arguments:
@*
ag-name - name of AutoGen value

@node SCM get-up-name
@subsection @file{get-up-name} - get upper cased named value, mapped to C name syntax
@findex get-up-name

@ignore
Generated from auto_gen.tpl line 537.
Extracted from /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/expState.c line 487.
@end ignore

Usage:  (get-up-name ag-name)
@*
Get the first string value associated with the name.  It will either
return the associated string value (if the name resolves), the alternate
value (if one is provided), or else the empty string.  The result is
passed through "string->c-name!" and "string->up-case!".

Arguments:
@*
ag-name - name of AutoGen value

@node SCM high-lim
@subsection @file{high-lim} - get highest value index
@findex high-lim

@ignore
Generated from auto_gen.tpl line 537.
Extracted from /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/expState.c line 527.
@end ignore

Usage:  (high-lim ag-name)
@*
Returns the highest index associated with an array of definitions.
This is generally, but not necessarily, one less than the
@code{count} value.  (The indexes may be specified, rendering a
non-zero based or sparse array of values.)

This is very useful for specifying the size of a zero-based array
of values where not all values are present.  For example:

@example
tMyStruct myVals[ [+ (+ 1 (high-lim "my-val-list")) +] ];
@end example

Arguments:
@*
ag-name - name of AutoGen value

@node SCM last-for?
@subsection @file{last-for?} - detect last iteration
@findex last-for?

@ignore
Generated from auto_gen.tpl line 537.
Extracted from /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/funcFor.c line 88.
@end ignore

Usage:  (last-for? [ for_var ])
@*
Returns SCM_BOOL_T if the named FOR loop (or, if not named, the
current innermost loop) is on the last pass through the data.
Outside of any FOR loop, it returns SCM_UNDEFINED.
@xref{FOR}.

Arguments:
@*
for_var - Optional - which for loop

@node SCM len
@subsection @file{len} - get count of values
@findex len

@ignore
Generated from auto_gen.tpl line 537.
Extracted from /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/expState.c line 573.
@end ignore

Usage:  (len ag-name)
@*
If the named object is a group definition, then "len" is
the same as "count".  Otherwise, if it is one or more text
definitions, then it is the sum of their string lengths.
If it is a single text definition, then it is equivalent to
@code{(string-length (get "ag-name"))}.

Arguments:
@*
ag-name - name of AutoGen value

@node SCM low-lim
@subsection @file{low-lim} - get lowest value index
@findex low-lim

@ignore
Generated from auto_gen.tpl line 537.
Extracted from /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/expState.c line 594.
@end ignore

Usage:  (low-lim ag-name)
@*
Returns the lowest index associated with an array of definitions.

Arguments:
@*
ag-name - name of AutoGen value

@node SCM make-header-guard
@subsection @file{make-header-guard} - make self-inclusion guard
@findex make-header-guard

@ignore
Generated from auto_gen.tpl line 537.
Extracted from /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/expOutput.c line 795.
@end ignore

Usage:  (make-header-guard name)
@*
This function will create a @code{#ifndef}/@code{#define}
sequence for protecting a header from multiple evaluation.
It will also set the Scheme variable @code{header-file}
to the name of the file being protected and it will set
@code{header-guard} to the name of the @code{#define} being
used to protect it.  It is expected that this will be used
as follows:
@example
[+ (make-header-guard "group_name") +]
...
#endif /* [+ (. header-guard) +] */

#include "[+ (. header-file)  +]"
@end example
@noindent
The @code{#define} name is composed as follows:

@enumerate
@item
The first element is the string argument and a separating underscore.
@item
That is followed by the name of the header file with illegal
characters mapped to underscores.
@item
The end of the name is always, "@code{_GUARD}".
@item
Finally, the entire string is mapped to upper case.
@end enumerate

The final @code{#define} name is stored in an SCM symbol named
@code{header-guard}.  Consequently, the concluding @code{#endif} for the
file should read something like:

@example
#endif /* [+ (. header-guard) +] */
@end example

The name of the header file (the current output file) is also stored
in an SCM symbol, @code{header-file}.  Therefore, if you are also
generating a C file that uses the previously generated header file,
you can put this into that generated file:

@example
#include "[+ (. header-file) +]"
@end example

Obviously, if you are going to produce more than one header file from
a particular template, you will need to be careful how these SCM symbols
get handled.

Arguments:
@*
name - header group name

@node SCM make-tmp-dir
@subsection @file{make-tmp-dir} - create a temporary directory
@findex make-tmp-dir

@ignore
Generated from auto_gen.tpl line 537.
Extracted from /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/expOutput.c line 554.
@end ignore

Usage:  (make-tmp-dir)
@*
Create a directory that will be cleaned up upon exit.

This Scheme function takes no arguments.

@node SCM match-value?
@subsection @file{match-value?} - test for matching value
@findex match-value?

@ignore
Generated from auto_gen.tpl line 537.
Extracted from /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/expState.c line 401.
@end ignore

Usage:  (match-value? op ag-name test-str)
@*
This function answers the question, "Is there an AutoGen value named
@code{ag-name} with a value that matches the pattern @code{test-str}
using the match function @code{op}?"  Return SCM_BOOL_T iff at least
one occurrence of the specified name has such a value.  The operator
can be any function that takes two string arguments and yields a
boolean.  It is expected that you will use one of the string matching
functions provided by AutoGen.
@*
The value name must follow the same rules as the
@code{ag-name} argument for @code{exist?} (@pxref{SCM exist?}).

Arguments:
@*
op - boolean result operator
@*
ag-name - name of AutoGen value
@*
test-str - string to test against

@node SCM out-delete
@subsection @file{out-delete} - delete current output file
@findex out-delete

@ignore
Generated from auto_gen.tpl line 537.
Extracted from /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/expOutput.c line 210.
@end ignore

Usage:  (out-delete)
@*
Remove the current output file.  Cease processing the template for
the current suffix.  It is an error if there are @code{push}-ed
output files.  Use the @code{(error "0")} scheme function instead.
@xref{output controls}.

This Scheme function takes no arguments.

@node SCM out-depth
@subsection @file{out-depth} - output file stack depth
@findex out-depth

@ignore
Generated from auto_gen.tpl line 537.
Extracted from /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/expOutput.c line 729.
@end ignore

Usage:  (out-depth)
@*
Returns the depth of the output file stack.
@xref{output controls}.

This Scheme function takes no arguments.

@node SCM out-emit-suspended
@subsection @file{out-emit-suspended} - emit the text of suspended output
@findex out-emit-suspended

@ignore
Generated from auto_gen.tpl line 537.
Extracted from /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/expOutput.c line 438.
@end ignore

Usage:  (out-emit-suspended susp_nm)
@*
This function is equivalent to
@code{(begin (out-resume <name>) (out-pop #t))}

Arguments:
@*
susp_nm - A name tag of suspended output

@node SCM out-line
@subsection @file{out-line} - output file line number
@findex out-line

@ignore
Generated from auto_gen.tpl line 537.
Extracted from /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/expOutput.c line 759.
@end ignore

Usage:  (out-line)
@*
Returns the current line number of the output file.
It rewinds and reads the file to count newlines.

This Scheme function takes no arguments.

@node SCM out-move
@subsection @file{out-move} - change name of output file
@findex out-move

@ignore
Generated from auto_gen.tpl line 537.
Extracted from /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/expOutput.c line 235.
@end ignore

Usage:  (out-move new-name)
@*
Rename current output file.  @xref{output controls}.
Please note: changing the name will not save a temporary file from
being deleted.  It @i{may}, however, be used on the root output file.

Arguments:
@*
new-name - new name for the current output file

@node SCM out-name
@subsection @file{out-name} - current output file name
@findex out-name

@ignore
Generated from auto_gen.tpl line 537.
Extracted from /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/expOutput.c line 742.
@end ignore

Usage:  (out-name)
@*
Returns the name of the current output file.  If the current file
is a temporary, unnamed file, then it will scan up the chain until
a real output file name is found.
@xref{output controls}.

This Scheme function takes no arguments.

@node SCM out-pop
@subsection @file{out-pop} - close current output file
@findex out-pop

@ignore
Generated from auto_gen.tpl line 537.
Extracted from /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/expOutput.c line 275.
@end ignore

Usage:  (out-pop [ disp ])
@*
If there has been a @code{push} on the output, then close that
file and go back to the previously open file.  It is an error
if there has not been a @code{push}.  @xref{output controls}.

If there is no argument, no further action is taken.  Otherwise,
the argument should be @code{#t} and the contents of the file
are returned by the function.

Arguments:
@*
disp - Optional - return contents of the file

@node SCM out-push-add
@subsection @file{out-push-add} - append output to file
@findex out-push-add

@ignore
Generated from auto_gen.tpl line 537.
Extracted from /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/expOutput.c line 530.
@end ignore

Usage:  (out-push-add file-name)
@*
Identical to @code{push-new}, except the contents are @strong{not}
purged, but appended to.  @xref{output controls}.

Arguments:
@*
file-name - name of the file to append text to

@node SCM out-push-new
@subsection @file{out-push-new} - purge and create output file
@findex out-push-new

@ignore
Generated from auto_gen.tpl line 537.
Extracted from /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/expOutput.c line 583.
@end ignore

Usage:  (out-push-new [ file-name ])
@*
Leave the current output file open, but purge and create
a new file that will remain open until a @code{pop} @code{delete}
or @code{switch} closes it.  The file name is optional and, if omitted,
the output will be sent to a temporary file that will be deleted when
it is closed.
@xref{output controls}.

Arguments:
@*
file-name - Optional - name of the file to create

@node SCM out-resume
@subsection @file{out-resume} - resume suspended output file
@findex out-resume

@ignore
Generated from auto_gen.tpl line 537.
Extracted from /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/expOutput.c line 402.
@end ignore

Usage:  (out-resume susp_nm)
@*
If there has been a suspended output, then make that output descriptor
current again.  That output must have been suspended with the same tag
name given to this routine as its argument.

Arguments:
@*
susp_nm - A name tag for reactivating

@node SCM out-suspend
@subsection @file{out-suspend} - suspend current output file
@findex out-suspend

@ignore
Generated from auto_gen.tpl line 537.
Extracted from /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/expOutput.c line 359.
@end ignore

Usage:  (out-suspend suspName)
@*
If there has been a @code{push} on the output, then set aside the output
descriptor for later reactiviation with @code{(out-resume "xxx")}.  The
tag name need not reflect the name of the output file.  In fact, the
output file may be an anonymous temporary file.  You may also change the
tag every time you suspend output to a file, because the tag names are
forgotten as soon as the file has been "resumed".

Arguments:
@*
suspName - A name tag for reactivating

@node SCM out-switch
@subsection @file{out-switch} - close and create new output
@findex out-switch

@ignore
Generated from auto_gen.tpl line 537.
Extracted from /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/expOutput.c line 667.
@end ignore

Usage:  (out-switch file-name)
@*
Switch output files - close current file and make the current
file pointer refer to the new file.  This is equivalent to
@code{out-pop} followed by @code{out-push-new}, except that
you may not pop the base level output file, but you may
@code{switch} it.  @xref{output controls}.

Arguments:
@*
file-name - name of the file to create

@node SCM output-file-next-line
@subsection @file{output-file-next-line} - print the file name and next line number
@findex output-file-next-line

@ignore
Generated from auto_gen.tpl line 537.
Extracted from /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/expOutput.c line 323.
@end ignore

Usage:  (output-file-next-line [ line_off ] [ alt_fmt ])
@*
Returns a string with the current output file name and line number.
The default format is: # <line+1> "<output-file-name>" The argument may be
either a number indicating an offset from the current output line number
or an alternate formatting string.  If both are provided, then the first
must be a numeric offset.

Be careful that you are directing output to the final output file.
Otherwise, you will get the file name and line number of the temporary
file.  That won't be what you want.

Arguments:
@*
line_off - Optional - offset to line number
@*
alt_fmt - Optional - alternate format string

@node SCM set-option
@subsection @file{set-option} - Set a command line option
@findex set-option

@ignore
Generated from auto_gen.tpl line 537.
Extracted from /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/expState.c line 622.
@end ignore

Usage:  (set-option opt)
@*
The text argument must be an option name followed by any needed
option argument.  Returns SCM_UNDEFINED.

Arguments:
@*
opt - AutoGen option name + its argument

@node SCM set-writable
@subsection @file{set-writable} - Make the output file be writable
@findex set-writable

@ignore
Generated from auto_gen.tpl line 537.
Extracted from /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/funcIf.c line 449.
@end ignore

Usage:  (set-writable [ set? ])
@*
This function will set the current output file to be writable
(or not).  This is only effective if neither the @code{--writable}
nor @code{--not-writable} have been specified.  This state
is reset when the current suffix's output is complete.

Arguments:
@*
set? - Optional - boolean arg, false to make output non-writable

@node SCM stack
@subsection @file{stack} - make list of AutoGen values
@findex stack

@ignore
Generated from auto_gen.tpl line 537.
Extracted from /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/expString.c line 873.
@end ignore

Usage:  (stack ag-name)
@*
Create a scheme list of all the strings that are associated
with a name.  They must all be text values or we choke.

Arguments:
@*
ag-name - AutoGen value name

@node SCM stack-join
@subsection @file{stack-join} - stack values then join them
@findex stack-join

@ignore
Generated from auto_gen.tpl line 537.
Extracted from /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/schemedef.scm line 376.
@end ignore

Usage:  (stack-join join ag-name)
@*
This function will collect all the values named @code{ag-name}
(see the @pxref{SCM stack, stack function}) and join them
separated by the @code{join} string (see the
@pxref{SCM join, join function}).

Arguments:
@*
join - string between each element
@*
ag-name - name of autogen values to stack

@node SCM suffix
@subsection @file{suffix} - get the current suffix
@findex suffix

@ignore
Generated from auto_gen.tpl line 537.
Extracted from /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/expState.c line 639.
@end ignore

Usage:  (suffix)
@*
Returns the current active suffix (@pxref{pseudo macro}).

This Scheme function takes no arguments.

@node SCM tpl-file
@subsection @file{tpl-file} - get the template file name
@findex tpl-file

@ignore
Generated from auto_gen.tpl line 537.
Extracted from /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/expState.c line 653.
@end ignore

Usage:  (tpl-file [ full_path ])
@*
Returns the name of the current template file.
If @code{#t} is passed in as an argument, then the template
file is hunted for in the template search path.  Otherwise,
just the unadorned name.

Arguments:
@*
full_path - Optional - include full path to file

@node SCM tpl-file-line
@subsection @file{tpl-file-line} - get the template file+line number
@findex tpl-file-line

@ignore
Generated from auto_gen.tpl line 537.
Extracted from /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/expState.c line 701.
@end ignore

Usage:  (tpl-file-line [ msg-fmt ])
@*
Returns the file and line number of the current template macro using
either the default format, "from %s line %d", or else the format you
supply.  For example, if you want to insert a "C" language file-line
directive, you would supply the format "# %2$d \"%1$s\"", but that
is also already supplied with the scheme variable
@xref{SCM c-file-line-fmt}.  You may use it thus:
@example
(tpl-file-line c-file-line-fmt)
@end example

It is also safe to use the formatting string, "%2$d".  AutoGen uses
an argument vector version of printf: @xref{snprintfv},
and it does not need to know the types of each argument in order to
skip forward to the second argument.

Arguments:
@*
msg-fmt - Optional - formatting for line message

@node SCM tpl-file-next-line
@subsection @file{tpl-file-next-line} - get the template file plus next line number
@findex tpl-file-next-line

@ignore
Generated from auto_gen.tpl line 537.
Extracted from /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/expState.c line 733.
@end ignore

Usage:  (tpl-file-next-line [ msg-fmt ])
@*
This is almost the same as @xref{SCM tpl-file-line}, except that
the line referenced is the next line, per C compiler conventions, and
consequently defaults to the format:  # <line-no+1> "<file-name>"

Arguments:
@*
msg-fmt - Optional - formatting for line message

@ignore
Generated from auto_gen.tpl line 273.
@end ignore

@node SCM autogen-version
@subsection @file{autogen-version} - autogen version number
@findex autogen-version

This is a symbol defining the current AutoGen version number string.
It was first defined in AutoGen-5.2.14.
It is currently ``5.15''.

@node SCM c-file-line-fmt
@subsection format file info as, ``@code{#line nn "file"}''
@findex c-file-line-fmt

This is a symbol that can easily be used with the functions
@xref{SCM tpl-file-line}, and @xref{SCM def-file-line}.
These will emit C program @code{#line} directives pointing to template
and definitions text, respectively.
@ignore

* * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * *

@end ignore
@page
@node Common Functions
@section Common Scheme Functions

This section describes a number of general purpose functions that make
the kind of string processing that AutoGen does a little easier.
Unlike the AutoGen specific functions (@pxref{AutoGen Functions}),
these functions are available for direct use during definition load time.
The equality test (@pxref{SCM =}) is ``overloaded'' to do string equivalence
comparisons.  If you are looking for inequality, the Scheme/Lisp way
of spelling that is, ``(not (= ...))''.

@menu
* SCM agpl::               @file{agpl} - GNU Affero General Public License
* SCM bsd::                @file{bsd} - BSD Public License
* SCM c-string::           @file{c-string} - emit string for ANSI C
* SCM error-source-line::  @file{error-source-line} - display of file & line
* SCM extract::            @file{extract} - extract text from another file
* SCM format-arg-count::   @file{format-arg-count} - count the args to a format
* SCM fprintf::            @file{fprintf} - format to a file
* SCM gperf::              @file{gperf} - perform a perfect hash function
* SCM gperf-code::         @file{gperf-code} - emit the source of the generated gperf program
* SCM gpl::                @file{gpl} - GNU General Public License
* SCM hide-email::         @file{hide-email} - convert eaddr to javascript
* SCM html-escape-encode:: @file{html-escape-encode} - encode html special characters
* SCM in?::                @file{in?} - test for string in list
* SCM join::               @file{join} - join string list with separator
* SCM kr-string::          @file{kr-string} - emit string for K&R C
* SCM lgpl::               @file{lgpl} - GNU Library General Public License
* SCM license::            @file{license} - an arbitrary license
* SCM license-description:: @file{license-description} - Emit a license description
* SCM license-full::       @file{license-full} - Emit the licensing information and description
* SCM license-info::       @file{license-info} - Emit the licensing information and copyright years
* SCM license-name::       @file{license-name} - Emit the name of the license
* SCM make-gperf::         @file{make-gperf} - build a perfect hash function program
* SCM makefile-script::    @file{makefile-script} - create makefile script
* SCM max::                @file{max} - maximum value in list
* SCM min::                @file{min} - minimum value in list
* SCM prefix::             @file{prefix} - prefix lines with a string
* SCM printf::             @file{printf} - format to stdout
* SCM raw-shell-str::      @file{raw-shell-str} - single quote shell string
* SCM shell::              @file{shell} - invoke a shell script
* SCM shell-str::          @file{shell-str} - double quote shell string
* SCM shellf::             @file{shellf} - format a string, run shell
* SCM sprintf::            @file{sprintf} - format a string
* SCM string-capitalize::  @file{string-capitalize} - capitalize a new string
* SCM string-capitalize!:: @file{string-capitalize!} - capitalize a string
* SCM *=*::                @file{string-contains-eqv?} - caseless substring
* SCM *==*::               @file{string-contains?} - substring match
* SCM string-downcase::    @file{string-downcase} - lower case a new string
* SCM string-downcase!::   @file{string-downcase!} - make a string be lower case
* SCM *~::                 @file{string-end-eqv-match?} - caseless regex ending
* SCM *~~::                @file{string-end-match?} - regex match end
* SCM *=::                 @file{string-ends-eqv?} - caseless string ending
* SCM *==::                @file{string-ends-with?} - string ending
* SCM ==::                 @file{string-equals?} - string matching
* SCM ~::                  @file{string-eqv-match?} - caseless regex match
* SCM =::                  @file{string-eqv?} - caseless string match
* SCM *~*::                @file{string-has-eqv-match?} - caseless regex contains
* SCM *~~*::               @file{string-has-match?} - contained regex match
* SCM ~~::                 @file{string-match?} - regex match
* SCM ~*::                 @file{string-start-eqv-match?} - caseless regex start
* SCM ~~*::                @file{string-start-match?} - regex match start
* SCM =*::                 @file{string-starts-eqv?} - caseless string start
* SCM ==*::                @file{string-starts-with?} - string starting
* SCM string-substitute::  @file{string-substitute} - multiple global replacements
* SCM string-table-add::   @file{string-table-add} - Add an entry to a string table
* SCM string-table-add-ref:: @file{string-table-add-ref} - Add an entry to a string table, get reference
* SCM string-table-new::   @file{string-table-new} - create a string table
* SCM string-table-size::  @file{string-table-size} - print the current size of a string table
* SCM string->c-name!::    @file{string->c-name!} - map non-name chars to underscore
* SCM string->camelcase::  @file{string->camelcase} - make a string be CamelCase
* SCM string-tr::          @file{string-tr} - convert characters with new result
* SCM string-tr!::         @file{string-tr!} - convert characters
* SCM string-upcase::      @file{string-upcase} - upper case a new string
* SCM string-upcase!::     @file{string-upcase!} - make a string be upper case
* SCM sub-shell-str::      @file{sub-shell-str} - back quoted (sub-)shell string
* SCM sum::                @file{sum} - sum of values in list
* SCM time-string->number:: @file{time-string->number} - duration string to seconds
* SCM version-compare::    @file{version-compare} - compare two version numbers
@end menu


@node SCM agpl
@subsection @file{agpl} - GNU Affero General Public License
@findex agpl

@ignore
Generated from auto_gen.tpl line 537.
Extracted from /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/expFormat.c line 650.
@end ignore

Usage:  (agpl prog-name prefix)
@*
Emit a string that contains the GNU Affero General Public License.
This function is now deprecated.  Please @xref{SCM license-description}.

Arguments:
@*
prog-name - name of the program under the GPL
@*
prefix - String for starting each output line

@node SCM bsd
@subsection @file{bsd} - BSD Public License
@findex bsd

@ignore
Generated from auto_gen.tpl line 537.
Extracted from /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/expFormat.c line 697.
@end ignore

Usage:  (bsd prog_name owner prefix)
@*
Emit a string that contains the Free BSD Public License.
This function is now deprecated.  Please @xref{SCM license-description}.

Arguments:
@*
prog_name - name of the program under the BSD
@*
owner - Grantor of the BSD License
@*
prefix - String for starting each output line

@node SCM c-string
@subsection @file{c-string} - emit string for ANSI C
@findex c-string

@ignore
Generated from auto_gen.tpl line 537.
Extracted from /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/expString.c line 937.
@end ignore

Usage:  (c-string string)
@*
Reform a string so that, when printed, the C compiler will be able to
compile the data and construct a string that contains exactly what the
current string contains.  Many non-printing characters are replaced with
escape sequences.  Newlines are replaced with a backslash, an @code{n}, a
closing quote, a newline, seven spaces and another re-opening quote.  The
compiler will implicitly concatenate them.  The reader will see line
breaks.

A K&R compiler will choke.  Use @code{kr-string} for that compiler.

Arguments:
@*
string - string to reformat

@node SCM error-source-line
@subsection @file{error-source-line} - display of file & line
@findex error-source-line

@ignore
Generated from auto_gen.tpl line 537.
Extracted from /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/funcEval.c line 296.
@end ignore

Usage:  (error-source-line)
@*
This function is only invoked just before Guile displays
an error message.  It displays the file name and line number
that triggered the evaluation error.  You should not need to
invoke this routine directly.  Guile will do it automatically.

This Scheme function takes no arguments.

@node SCM extract
@subsection @file{extract} - extract text from another file
@findex extract

@ignore
Generated from auto_gen.tpl line 537.
Extracted from /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/expExtract.c line 186.
@end ignore

Usage:  (extract file-name marker-fmt [ caveat ] [ default ])
@*
This function is used to help construct output files that may contain
text that is carried from one version of the output to the next.

The first two arguments are required, the second are optional:

@itemize @bullet
@item
The @code{file-name} argument is used to name the file that
contains the demarcated text.
@item
The @code{marker-fmt} is a formatting string that is used to construct
the starting and ending demarcation strings.  The sprintf function is
given the @code{marker-fmt} with two arguments.  The first is either
"START" or "END".  The second is either "DO NOT CHANGE THIS COMMENT"
or the optional @code{caveat} argument.
@item
@code{caveat} is presumed to be absent if it is the empty string
(@code{""}).  If absent, ``DO NOT CHANGE THIS COMMENT'' is used
as the second string argument to the @code{marker-fmt}.
@item
When a @code{default} argument is supplied and no pre-existing text
is found, then this text will be inserted between the START and END
markers.
@end itemize

@noindent
The resulting strings are presumed to be unique within
the subject file.  As a simplified example:

@example
[+ (extract "fname" "// %s - SOMETHING - %s" ""
"example default") +]
@end example
@noindent
will result in the following text being inserted into the output:

@example
// START - SOMETHING - DO NOT CHANGE THIS COMMENT
example default
// END   - SOMETHING - DO NOT CHANGE THIS COMMENT
@end example

@noindent
The ``@code{example default}'' string can then be carried forward to
the next generation of the output, @strong{@i{provided}} the output
is not named "@code{fname}" @i{and} the old output is renamed to
"@code{fname}" before AutoGen-eration begins.

@table @strong
@item NB:
You can set aside previously generated source files inside the pseudo
macro with a Guile/scheme function, extract the text you want to keep
with this extract function.  Just remember you should delete it at the
end, too.  Here is an example from my Finite State Machine generator:

@example
[+ AutoGen5 Template  -*- Mode: text -*-
h=%s-fsm.h   c=%s-fsm.c
(shellf
"test -f %1$s-fsm.h && mv -f %1$s-fsm.h .fsm.head
test -f %1$s-fsm.c && mv -f %1$s-fsm.c .fsm.code" (base-name))
+]
@end example

This code will move the two previously produced output files to files
named ".fsm.head" and ".fsm.code".  At the end of the 'c' output
processing, I delete them.

@item also NB:
This function presumes that the output file ought to be editable so
that the code between the @code{START} and @code{END} marks can be edited
by the template user.  Consequently, when the @code{(extract ...)} function
is invoked, if the @code{writable} option has not been specified, then
it will be set at that point.  If this is not the desired behavior, the
@code{--not-writable} command line option will override this.
Also, you may use the guile function @code{(chmod "file" mode-value)}
to override whatever AutoGen is using for the result mode.
@end table

Arguments:
@*
file-name - name of file with text
@*
marker-fmt - format for marker text
@*
caveat - Optional - warn about changing marker
@*
default - Optional - default initial text

@node SCM format-arg-count
@subsection @file{format-arg-count} - count the args to a format
@findex format-arg-count

@ignore
Generated from auto_gen.tpl line 537.
Extracted from /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/expPrint.c line 294.
@end ignore

Usage:  (format-arg-count format)
@*
Sometimes, it is useful to simply be able to figure out how many
arguments are required by a format string.  For example, if you
are extracting a format string for the purpose of generating a
macro to invoke a printf-like function, you can run the
formatting string through this function to determine how many
arguments to provide for in the macro. e.g. for this extraction
text:
@example

 /*=fumble bumble
  * fmt: 'stumble %s: %d\n'
 =*/
@end example

@noindent
You may wish to generate a macro:
@example

 #define BUMBLE(a1,a2) printf_like(something,(a1),(a2))
@end example

@noindent
You can do this by knowing that the format needs two arguments.

Arguments:
@*
format - formatting string

@node SCM fprintf
@subsection @file{fprintf} - format to a file
@findex fprintf

@ignore
Generated from auto_gen.tpl line 537.
Extracted from /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/expPrint.c line 230.
@end ignore

Usage:  (fprintf port format [ format-arg ... ])
@*
Format a string using arguments from the alist.
Write to a specified port.  The result will NOT appear in your
output.  Use this to print information messages to a template user.

Arguments:
@*
port - Guile-scheme output port
@*
format - formatting string
@*
format-arg - Optional - list of arguments to formatting string

@node SCM gperf
@subsection @file{gperf} - perform a perfect hash function
@findex gperf

@ignore
Generated from auto_gen.tpl line 537.
Extracted from /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/expGperf.c line 109.
@end ignore

Usage:  (gperf name str)
@*
Perform the perfect hash on the input string.  This is only useful if
you have previously created a gperf program with the @code{make-gperf}
function @xref{SCM make-gperf}.  The @code{name} you supply here must
match the name used to create the program and the string to hash must
be one of the strings supplied in the @code{make-gperf} string list.
The result will be a perfect hash index.

See the documentation for @command{gperf(1GNU)} for more details.

Arguments:
@*
name - name of hash list
@*
str - string to hash

@node SCM gperf-code
@subsection @file{gperf-code} - emit the source of the generated gperf program
@findex gperf-code

@ignore
Generated from auto_gen.tpl line 537.
Extracted from /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/schemedef.scm line 324.
@end ignore

Usage:  (gperf-code st-name)
@*
Returns the contents of the emitted code, suitable
for inclusion in another program.  The interface contains
the following elements:

@table @samp
@item struct @i{<st-name>}_index
containg the fields: @code{@{char const * name, int const id; @};}

@item @i{<st-name>}_hash()
This is the hashing function with local only scope (static).

@item @i{<st-name>}_find()
This is the searching and validation function.  The first argument
is the string to look up, the second is its length.
It returns a pointer to the corresponding @code{@i{<st-name>}_index}
entry.
@end table

Use this in your template as follows where "@i{<st-name>}" was
set to be "@code{lookup}":

@example
[+ (make-gperf "lookup" (join "\n" (stack "name_list")))
(gperf-code "lookup") +]
void my_fun(char * str) @{
struct lookup_index * li = lookup_find(str, strlen(str));
if (li != NULL) printf("%s yields %d\n", str, li->idx);
@end example

Arguments:
@*
st-name - the name of the gperf hash list

@node SCM gpl
@subsection @file{gpl} - GNU General Public License
@findex gpl

@ignore
Generated from auto_gen.tpl line 537.
Extracted from /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/expFormat.c line 627.
@end ignore

Usage:  (gpl prog-name prefix)
@*
Emit a string that contains the GNU General Public License.
This function is now deprecated.  Please @xref{SCM license-description}.

Arguments:
@*
prog-name - name of the program under the GPL
@*
prefix - String for starting each output line

@node SCM hide-email
@subsection @file{hide-email} - convert eaddr to javascript
@findex hide-email

@ignore
Generated from auto_gen.tpl line 537.
Extracted from /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/expPrint.c line 254.
@end ignore

Usage:  (hide-email display eaddr)
@*
Hides an email address as a java scriptlett.
The 'mailto:' tag and the email address are coded bytes
rather than plain text.  They are also broken up.

Arguments:
@*
display - display text
@*
eaddr - email address

@node SCM html-escape-encode
@subsection @file{html-escape-encode} - encode html special characters
@findex html-escape-encode

@ignore
Generated from auto_gen.tpl line 537.
Extracted from /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/schemedef.scm line 108.
@end ignore

Usage:  (html-escape-encode str)
@*
This function will replace replace the characters @code{'&'},
@code{'<'} and @code{'>'} characters with the HTML/XML
escape-encoded strings (@code{"&amp;"}, @code{"&lt;"}, and
@code{"&gt;"}, respectively).

Arguments:
@*
str - string to make substitutions in

@node SCM in?
@subsection @file{in?} - test for string in list
@findex in?

@ignore
Generated from auto_gen.tpl line 537.
Extracted from /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/expString.c line 440.
@end ignore

Usage:  (in? test-string string-list ...)
@*
Return SCM_BOOL_T if the first argument string is found
in one of the entries in the second (list-of-strings) argument.

Arguments:
@*
test-string - string to look for
@*
string-list - list of strings to check

@node SCM join
@subsection @file{join} - join string list with separator
@findex join

@ignore
Generated from auto_gen.tpl line 537.
Extracted from /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/expString.c line 507.
@end ignore

Usage:  (join separator list ...)
@*
With the first argument as the separator string,
joins together an a-list of strings into one long string.
The list may contain nested lists, partly because you
cannot always control that.

Arguments:
@*
separator - string to insert between entries
@*
list - list of strings to join

@node SCM kr-string
@subsection @file{kr-string} - emit string for K&R C
@findex kr-string

@ignore
Generated from auto_gen.tpl line 537.
Extracted from /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/expString.c line 915.
@end ignore

Usage:  (kr-string string)
@*
Reform a string so that, when printed, a K&R C compiler will be able
to compile the data and construct a string that contains exactly
what the current string contains.  Many non-printing characters are
replaced with escape sequences.  New-lines are replaced with a
backslash-n-backslash and newline sequence,

Arguments:
@*
string - string to reformat

@node SCM lgpl
@subsection @file{lgpl} - GNU Library General Public License
@findex lgpl

@ignore
Generated from auto_gen.tpl line 537.
Extracted from /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/expFormat.c line 673.
@end ignore

Usage:  (lgpl prog_name owner prefix)
@*
Emit a string that contains the GNU Library General Public License.
This function is now deprecated.  Please @xref{SCM license-description}.

Arguments:
@*
prog_name - name of the program under the LGPL
@*
owner - Grantor of the LGPL
@*
prefix - String for starting each output line

@node SCM license
@subsection @file{license} - an arbitrary license
@findex license

@ignore
Generated from auto_gen.tpl line 537.
Extracted from /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/expFormat.c line 722.
@end ignore

Usage:  (license lic_name prog_name owner prefix)
@*
Emit a string that contains the named license.
This function is now deprecated.  Please @xref{SCM license-description}.

Arguments:
@*
lic_name - file name of the license
@*
prog_name - name of the licensed program or library
@*
owner - Grantor of the License
@*
prefix - String for starting each output line

@node SCM license-description
@subsection @file{license-description} - Emit a license description
@findex license-description

@ignore
Generated from auto_gen.tpl line 537.
Extracted from /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/expFormat.c line 550.
@end ignore

Usage:  (license-description license prog-name prefix [ owner ])
@*
Emit a string that contains a detailed license description, with
substitutions for program name, copyright holder and a per-line prefix.
This is the text typically used as part of a source file header.
For more details, @xref{SCM license-full, the license-full command}.

Arguments:
@*
license - name of license type
@*
prog-name - name of the program under the GPL
@*
prefix - String for starting each output line
@*
owner - Optional - owner of the program

@node SCM license-full
@subsection @file{license-full} - Emit the licensing information and description
@findex license-full

@ignore
Generated from auto_gen.tpl line 537.
Extracted from /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/expFormat.c line 493.
@end ignore

Usage:  (license-full license prog-name prefix [ owner ] [ years ])
@*
Emit all the text that @code{license-info} and @code{license-description}
would emit (@pxref{SCM license-info, @code{license-info}},
and @pxref{SCM license-description, @code{license-description}}),
with all the same substitutions.

All of these depend upon the existence of a license file named after the
@code{license} argument with a @code{.lic} suffix.  That file should
contain three blocks of text, each separated by two or more newline
characters.

The first section describes copyright attribution and the name of the usage
licence.  For GNU software, this should be the text that is to be displayed
with the program version.  Four text markers can be replaced: <PFX>,
<program>, <years> and <owner>.

The second section is a short description of the terms of the license.
This is typically the kind of text that gets displayed in the header of
source files.  The third section is strictly the name of the license
without any substitution markers.  Only the <PFX>, <owner> and <program>
markers are substituted.

The third section is strictly the name of the license.
No marker substitutions are performed.

@example
<PFX>Copyright (C) <years> <owner>, all rights reserved.
<PFX>This is free software. It is licensed for use,
<PFX>modification and redistribution under the terms
<PFX>of the GNU General Public License, version 3 or later
<PFX>    <http://gnu.org/licenses/gpl.html>

<PFX><program> is free software: you can redistribute it
<PFX>and/or modify it under the terms of the GNU General
<PFX>Public License as published by the Free Software ...

the GNU General Public License, version 3 or later
@end example

Arguments:
@*
license - name of license type
@*
prog-name - name of the program under the GPL
@*
prefix - String for starting each output line
@*
owner - Optional - owner of the program
@*
years - Optional - copyright years

@node SCM license-info
@subsection @file{license-info} - Emit the licensing information and copyright years
@findex license-info

@ignore
Generated from auto_gen.tpl line 537.
Extracted from /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/expFormat.c line 574.
@end ignore

Usage:  (license-info license prog-name prefix [ owner ] [ years ])
@*
Emit a string that contains the licensing description, with some
substitutions for program name, copyright holder, a list of years when the
source was modified, and a per-line prefix.  This text typically includes a
brief license description and is often printed out when a program starts
running or as part of the @code{--version} output.
For more details, @xref{SCM license-full, the license-full command}.

Arguments:
@*
license - name of license type
@*
prog-name - name of the program under the GPL
@*
prefix - String for starting each output line
@*
owner - Optional - owner of the program
@*
years - Optional - copyright years

@node SCM license-name
@subsection @file{license-name} - Emit the name of the license
@findex license-name

@ignore
Generated from auto_gen.tpl line 537.
Extracted from /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/expFormat.c line 601.
@end ignore

Usage:  (license-name license)
@*
Emit a string that contains the full name of the license.

Arguments:
@*
license - name of license type

@node SCM make-gperf
@subsection @file{make-gperf} - build a perfect hash function program
@findex make-gperf

@ignore
Generated from auto_gen.tpl line 537.
Extracted from /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/expGperf.c line 39.
@end ignore

Usage:  (make-gperf name strings ...)
@*
Build a program to perform perfect hashes of a known list of input
strings.  This function produces no output, but prepares a program
named, @file{gperf_<name>} for use by the gperf function
@xref{SCM gperf}.

This program will be obliterated as AutoGen exits.
However, you may incorporate the generated hashing function
into your C program with commands something like the following:

@example
[+ (shellf "sed '/^int main(/,$d;/^#line/d' $@{gpdir@}/%s.c"
name ) +]
@end example

where @code{name} matches the name provided to this @code{make-perf}
function.  @code{gpdir} is the variable used to store the name of the
temporary directory used to stash all the files.

Arguments:
@*
name - name of hash list
@*
strings - list of strings to hash

@node SCM makefile-script
@subsection @file{makefile-script} - create makefile script
@findex makefile-script

@ignore
Generated from auto_gen.tpl line 537.
Extracted from /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/expMake.c line 252.
@end ignore

Usage:  (makefile-script text)
@*
This function will take ordinary shell script text and reformat it
so that it will work properly inside of a makefile shell script.
Not every shell construct can be supported; the intent is to have
most ordinary scripts work without much, if any, alteration.

The following transformations are performed on the source text:

@enumerate
@item
Trailing whitespace on each line is stripped.

@item
Except for the last line, the string, " ; \\" is appended to the end of
every line that does not end with certain special characters or keywords.
Note that this will mutilate multi-line quoted strings, but @command{make}
renders it impossible to use multi-line constructs anyway.

@item
If the line ends with a backslash, it is left alone.

@item
If the line ends with a semi-colon, conjunction operator,
pipe (vertical bar) or one of the keywords "then", "else" or "in", then
a space and a backslash is added, but no semi-colon.

@item
The dollar sign character is doubled, unless it immediately precedes an
opening parenthesis or the single character make macros '*', '<', '@@',
'?' or '%'.  Other single character make macros that do not have enclosing
parentheses will fail.  For shell usage of the "$@@", "$?" and "$*"
macros, you must enclose them with curly braces, e.g., "$@{?@}".
The ksh construct @code{$(<command>)} will not work.  Though some
@command{make}s accept @code{$@{var@}} constructs, this function will
assume it is for shell interpretation and double the dollar character.
You must use @code{$(var)} for all @command{make} substitutions.

@item
Double dollar signs are replaced by four before the next character
is examined.

@item
Every line is prefixed with a tab, unless the first line
already starts with a tab.

@item
The newline character on the last line, if present, is suppressed.

@item
Blank lines are stripped.

@item
Lines starting with "@@ifdef", "@@ifndef", "@@else" and "@@endif" are
presumed to be autoconf "sed" expression tags.  These lines will be
emitted as-is, with no tab prefix and no line splicing backslash.
These lines can then be processed at configure time with
@code{AC_CONFIG_FILES} sed expressions, similar to:

@example
sed "/^@@ifdef foo/d;/^@@endif foo/d;/^@@ifndef foo/,/^@@endif foo/d"
@end example
@end enumerate

@noindent
This function is intended to be used approximately as follows:

@example
$(TARGET) : $(DEPENDENCIES)
<+ (out-push-new) +>
....mostly arbitrary shell script text....
<+ (makefile-script (out-pop #t)) +>
@end example

Arguments:
@*
text - the text of the script

@node SCM max
@subsection @file{max} - maximum value in list
@findex max

@ignore
Generated from auto_gen.tpl line 537.
Extracted from /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/expGuile.c line 88.
@end ignore

Usage:  (max list ...)
@*
Return the maximum value in the list

Arguments:
@*
list - list of values.  Strings are converted to numbers

@node SCM min
@subsection @file{min} - minimum value in list
@findex min

@ignore
Generated from auto_gen.tpl line 537.
Extracted from /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/expGuile.c line 147.
@end ignore

Usage:  (min list ...)
@*
Return the minimum value in the list

Arguments:
@*
list - list of values.  Strings are converted to numbers

@node SCM prefix
@subsection @file{prefix} - prefix lines with a string
@findex prefix

@ignore
Generated from auto_gen.tpl line 537.
Extracted from /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/expString.c line 605.
@end ignore

Usage:  (prefix prefix text)
@*
Prefix every line in the second string with the first string.

For example, if the first string is "# " and the second contains:
@example
two
lines
@end example
@noindent
The result string will contain:
@example
# two
# lines
@end example

Arguments:
@*
prefix - string to insert at start of each line
@*
text - multi-line block of text

@node SCM printf
@subsection @file{printf} - format to stdout
@findex printf

@ignore
Generated from auto_gen.tpl line 537.
Extracted from /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/expPrint.c line 206.
@end ignore

Usage:  (printf format [ format-arg ... ])
@*
Format a string using arguments from the alist.
Write to the standard out port.  The result will NOT appear in your
output.  Use this to print information messages to a template user.
Use ``(sprintf ...)'' to add text to your document.

Arguments:
@*
format - formatting string
@*
format-arg - Optional - list of arguments to formatting string

@node SCM raw-shell-str
@subsection @file{raw-shell-str} - single quote shell string
@findex raw-shell-str

@ignore
Generated from auto_gen.tpl line 537.
Extracted from /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/expString.c line 687.
@end ignore

Usage:  (raw-shell-str string)
@*
Convert the text of the string into a singly quoted string
that a normal shell will process into the original string.
(It will not do macro expansion later, either.)
Contained single quotes become tripled, with the middle quote
escaped with a backslash.  Normal shells will reconstitute the
original string.

@strong{Notice}:  some shells will not correctly handle unusual
non-printing characters.  This routine works for most reasonably
conventional ASCII strings.

Arguments:
@*
string - string to transform

@node SCM shell
@subsection @file{shell} - invoke a shell script
@findex shell

@ignore
Generated from auto_gen.tpl line 537.
Extracted from /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/agShell.c line 57.
@end ignore

Usage:  (shell command)
@*
Generate a string by writing the value to a server shell and reading the
output back in.  The template programmer is responsible for ensuring that
it completes within 10 seconds.  If it does not, the server will be
killed, the output tossed and a new server started.

Please note: This is the same server process used by the '#shell'
definitions directive and backquoted @code{`} definitions.  There may be
left over state from previous shell expressions and the @code{`}
processing in the declarations.  However, a @code{cd} to the original
directory is always issued before the new command is issued.

Also note:  When initializing, autogen will set the environment
variable "AGexe" to the full path of the autogen executable.

Arguments:
@*
command - shell command - the result value is the stdout output.

@node SCM shell-str
@subsection @file{shell-str} - double quote shell string
@findex shell-str

@ignore
Generated from auto_gen.tpl line 537.
Extracted from /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/expString.c line 784.
@end ignore

Usage:  (shell-str string)
@*
Convert the text of the string into a double quoted string that a normal
shell will process into the original string, almost.  It will add the
escape character @code{\\} before two special characters to
accomplish this: the backslash @code{\\} and double quote @code{"}.

@strong{Notice}: some shells will not correctly handle unusual
non-printing characters.  This routine works for most reasonably
conventional ASCII strings.

@strong{WARNING}:
@*
This function omits the extra backslash in front of a backslash, however,
if it is followed by either a backquote or a dollar sign.  It must do this
because otherwise it would be impossible to protect the dollar sign or
backquote from shell evaluation.  Consequently, it is not possible to
render the strings "\\$" or "\\`".  The lesser of two evils.

All others characters are copied directly into the output.

The @code{sub-shell-str} variation of this routine behaves identically,
except that the extra backslash is omitted in front of @code{"} instead
of @code{`}.  You have to think about it.  I'm open to suggestions.

Meanwhile, the best way to document is with a detailed output example.
If the backslashes make it through the text processing correctly,
below you will see what happens with three example strings.  The first
example string contains a list of quoted @code{foo}s, the second is
the same with a single backslash before the quote characters and the
last is with two backslash escapes.  Below each is the result of the
@code{raw-shell-str}, @code{shell-str} and @code{sub-shell-str} functions.

@example
foo[0]           ''foo'' 'foo' "foo" `foo` $foo
raw-shell-str -> \'\''foo'\'\'' '\''foo'\'' "foo" `foo` $foo'
shell-str     -> "''foo'' 'foo' \"foo\" `foo` $foo"
sub-shell-str -> `''foo'' 'foo' "foo" \`foo\` $foo`

foo[1]           \'bar\' \"bar\" \`bar\` \$bar
raw-shell-str -> '\'\''bar\'\'' \"bar\" \`bar\` \$bar'
shell-str     -> "\\'bar\\' \\\"bar\\\" \`bar\` \$bar"
sub-shell-str -> `\\'bar\\' \"bar\" \\\`bar\\\` \$bar`

foo[2]           \\'BAZ\\' \\"BAZ\\" \\`BAZ\\` \\$BAZ
raw-shell-str -> '\\'\''BAZ\\'\'' \\"BAZ\\" \\`BAZ\\` \\$BAZ'
shell-str     -> "\\\\'BAZ\\\\' \\\\\"BAZ\\\\\" \\\`BAZ\\\` \\\$BAZ"
sub-shell-str -> `\\\\'BAZ\\\\' \\\"BAZ\\\" \\\\\`BAZ\\\\\` \\\$BAZ`
@end example

There should be four, three, five and three backslashes for the four
examples on the last line, respectively.  The next to last line should
have four, five, three and three backslashes.  If this was not accurately
reproduced, take a look at the agen5/test/shell.test test.  Notice the
backslashes in front of the dollar signs.  It goes from zero to one to
three for the "cooked" string examples.

Arguments:
@*
string - string to transform

@node SCM shellf
@subsection @file{shellf} - format a string, run shell
@findex shellf

@ignore
Generated from auto_gen.tpl line 537.
Extracted from /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/agShell.c line 96.
@end ignore

Usage:  (shellf format [ format-arg ... ])
@*
Format a string using arguments from the alist,
then send the result to the shell for interpretation.

Arguments:
@*
format - formatting string
@*
format-arg - Optional - list of arguments to formatting string

@node SCM sprintf
@subsection @file{sprintf} - format a string
@findex sprintf

@ignore
Generated from auto_gen.tpl line 537.
Extracted from /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/expPrint.c line 183.
@end ignore

Usage:  (sprintf format [ format-arg ... ])
@*
Format a string using arguments from the alist.

Arguments:
@*
format - formatting string
@*
format-arg - Optional - list of arguments to formatting string

@node SCM string-capitalize
@subsection @file{string-capitalize} - capitalize a new string
@findex string-capitalize

@ignore
Generated from auto_gen.tpl line 537.
Extracted from /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/expGuile.c line 385.
@end ignore

Usage:  (string-capitalize str)
@*
Create a new SCM string containing the same text as the original,
only all the first letter of each word is upper cased and all
other letters are made lower case.

Arguments:
@*
str - input string

@node SCM string-capitalize!
@subsection @file{string-capitalize!} - capitalize a string
@findex string-capitalize!

@ignore
Generated from auto_gen.tpl line 537.
Extracted from /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/expGuile.c line 342.
@end ignore

Usage:  (string-capitalize! str)
@*
capitalize all the words in an SCM string.

Arguments:
@*
str - input/output string

@node SCM *=*
@subsection @file{string-contains-eqv?} - caseless substring
@findex string-contains-eqv?
@findex *=*

@ignore
Generated from auto_gen.tpl line 537.
Extracted from /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/funcCase.c line 288.
@end ignore

Usage:  (*=* text match)
@*
string-contains-eqv?:  Test to see if a string contains an equivalent string.
`equivalent' means the strings match, but without regard
to character case and certain characters are considered `equivalent'.
Viz., '-', '_' and '^' are equivalent.

Arguments:
@*
text - text to test for pattern
@*
match - pattern/substring to search for

@node SCM *==*
@subsection @file{string-contains?} - substring match
@findex string-contains?
@findex *==*

@ignore
Generated from auto_gen.tpl line 537.
Extracted from /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/funcCase.c line 155.
@end ignore

Usage:  (*==* text match)
@*
string-contains?:  Test to see if a string contains a substring.  "strstr(3)"
will find an address.

Arguments:
@*
text - text to test for pattern
@*
match - pattern/substring to search for

@node SCM string-downcase
@subsection @file{string-downcase} - lower case a new string
@findex string-downcase

@ignore
Generated from auto_gen.tpl line 537.
Extracted from /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/expGuile.c line 440.
@end ignore

Usage:  (string-downcase str)
@*
Create a new SCM string containing the same text as the original,
only all the upper case letters are changed to lower case.

Arguments:
@*
str - input string

@node SCM string-downcase!
@subsection @file{string-downcase!} - make a string be lower case
@findex string-downcase!

@ignore
Generated from auto_gen.tpl line 537.
Extracted from /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/expGuile.c line 409.
@end ignore

Usage:  (string-downcase! str)
@*
Change to lower case all the characters in an SCM string.

Arguments:
@*
str - input/output string

@node SCM *~
@subsection @file{string-end-eqv-match?} - caseless regex ending
@findex string-end-eqv-match?
@findex *~

@ignore
Generated from auto_gen.tpl line 537.
Extracted from /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/funcCase.c line 547.
@end ignore

Usage:  (*~ text match)
@*
string-end-eqv-match?:  Test to see if a string ends with a pattern.
Case is not significant.

Arguments:
@*
text - text to test for pattern
@*
match - pattern/substring to search for

@node SCM *~~
@subsection @file{string-end-match?} - regex match end
@findex string-end-match?
@findex *~~

@ignore
Generated from auto_gen.tpl line 537.
Extracted from /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/funcCase.c line 534.
@end ignore

Usage:  (*~~ text match)
@*
string-end-match?:  Test to see if a string ends with a pattern.
Case is significant.

Arguments:
@*
text - text to test for pattern
@*
match - pattern/substring to search for

@node SCM *=
@subsection @file{string-ends-eqv?} - caseless string ending
@findex string-ends-eqv?
@findex *=

@ignore
Generated from auto_gen.tpl line 537.
Extracted from /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/funcCase.c line 336.
@end ignore

Usage:  (*= text match)
@*
string-ends-eqv?:  Test to see if a string ends with an equivalent string.

Arguments:
@*
text - text to test for pattern
@*
match - pattern/substring to search for

@node SCM *==
@subsection @file{string-ends-with?} - string ending
@findex string-ends-with?
@findex *==

@ignore
Generated from auto_gen.tpl line 537.
Extracted from /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/funcCase.c line 184.
@end ignore

Usage:  (*== text match)
@*
string-ends-with?:  Test to see if a string ends with a substring.
strcmp(3) returns zero for comparing the string ends.

Arguments:
@*
text - text to test for pattern
@*
match - pattern/substring to search for

@node SCM ==
@subsection @file{string-equals?} - string matching
@findex string-equals?
@findex ==

@ignore
Generated from auto_gen.tpl line 537.
Extracted from /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/funcCase.c line 259.
@end ignore

Usage:  (== text match)
@*
string-equals?:  Test to see if two strings exactly match.

Arguments:
@*
text - text to test for pattern
@*
match - pattern/substring to search for

@node SCM ~
@subsection @file{string-eqv-match?} - caseless regex match
@findex string-eqv-match?
@findex ~

@ignore
Generated from auto_gen.tpl line 537.
Extracted from /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/funcCase.c line 735.
@end ignore

Usage:  (~ text match)
@*
string-eqv-match?:  Test to see if a string fully matches a pattern.
Case is not significant, but any character equivalences
must be expressed in your regular expression.

Arguments:
@*
text - text to test for pattern
@*
match - pattern/substring to search for

@node SCM =
@subsection @file{string-eqv?} - caseless string match
@findex string-eqv?
@findex =

@ignore
Generated from auto_gen.tpl line 537.
Extracted from /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/funcCase.c line 406.
@end ignore

Usage:  (= text match)
@*
string-eqv?:  Test to see if two strings are equivalent.  `equivalent' means the
strings match, but without regard to character case and certain
characters are considered `equivalent'.  Viz., '-', '_' and '^' are
equivalent.  If the arguments are not strings, then the result of the
numeric comparison is returned.

This is an overloaded operation.  If the arguments are not both
strings, then the query is passed through to @code{scm_num_eq_p()}.

Arguments:
@*
text - text to test for pattern
@*
match - pattern/substring to search for

@node SCM *~*
@subsection @file{string-has-eqv-match?} - caseless regex contains
@findex string-has-eqv-match?
@findex *~*

@ignore
Generated from auto_gen.tpl line 537.
Extracted from /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/funcCase.c line 465.
@end ignore

Usage:  (*~* text match)
@*
string-has-eqv-match?:  Test to see if a string contains a pattern.
Case is not significant.

Arguments:
@*
text - text to test for pattern
@*
match - pattern/substring to search for

@node SCM *~~*
@subsection @file{string-has-match?} - contained regex match
@findex string-has-match?
@findex *~~*

@ignore
Generated from auto_gen.tpl line 537.
Extracted from /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/funcCase.c line 452.
@end ignore

Usage:  (*~~* text match)
@*
string-has-match?:  Test to see if a string contains a pattern.
Case is significant.

Arguments:
@*
text - text to test for pattern
@*
match - pattern/substring to search for

@node SCM ~~
@subsection @file{string-match?} - regex match
@findex string-match?
@findex ~~

@ignore
Generated from auto_gen.tpl line 537.
Extracted from /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/funcCase.c line 722.
@end ignore

Usage:  (~~ text match)
@*
string-match?:  Test to see if a string fully matches a pattern.
Case is significant.

Arguments:
@*
text - text to test for pattern
@*
match - pattern/substring to search for

@node SCM ~*
@subsection @file{string-start-eqv-match?} - caseless regex start
@findex string-start-eqv-match?
@findex ~*

@ignore
Generated from auto_gen.tpl line 537.
Extracted from /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/funcCase.c line 641.
@end ignore

Usage:  (~* text match)
@*
string-start-eqv-match?:  Test to see if a string starts with a pattern.
Case is not significant.

Arguments:
@*
text - text to test for pattern
@*
match - pattern/substring to search for

@node SCM ~~*
@subsection @file{string-start-match?} - regex match start
@findex string-start-match?
@findex ~~*

@ignore
Generated from auto_gen.tpl line 537.
Extracted from /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/funcCase.c line 628.
@end ignore

Usage:  (~~* text match)
@*
string-start-match?:  Test to see if a string starts with a pattern.
Case is significant.

Arguments:
@*
text - text to test for pattern
@*
match - pattern/substring to search for

@node SCM =*
@subsection @file{string-starts-eqv?} - caseless string start
@findex string-starts-eqv?
@findex =*

@ignore
Generated from auto_gen.tpl line 537.
Extracted from /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/funcCase.c line 373.
@end ignore

Usage:  (=* text match)
@*
string-starts-eqv?:  Test to see if a string starts with an equivalent string.

Arguments:
@*
text - text to test for pattern
@*
match - pattern/substring to search for

@node SCM ==*
@subsection @file{string-starts-with?} - string starting
@findex string-starts-with?
@findex ==*

@ignore
Generated from auto_gen.tpl line 537.
Extracted from /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/funcCase.c line 223.
@end ignore

Usage:  (==* text match)
@*
string-starts-with?:  Test to see if a string starts with a substring.

Arguments:
@*
text - text to test for pattern
@*
match - pattern/substring to search for

@node SCM string-substitute
@subsection @file{string-substitute} - multiple global replacements
@findex string-substitute

@ignore
Generated from auto_gen.tpl line 537.
Extracted from /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/expString.c line 1055.
@end ignore

Usage:  (string-substitute source match repl)
@*
@code{match} and  @code{repl} may be either a single string or
a list of strings.  Either way, they must have the same structure
and number of elements.  For example, to replace all amphersands,
less than and greater than characters, do something like this:

@example
(string-substitute source
(list "&"     "<"    ">")
(list "&amp;" "&lt;" "&gt;"))
@end example

Arguments:
@*
source - string to transform
@*
match - substring or substring list to be replaced
@*
repl - replacement strings or substrings

@node SCM string-table-add
@subsection @file{string-table-add} - Add an entry to a string table
@findex string-table-add

@ignore
Generated from auto_gen.tpl line 537.
Extracted from /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/schemedef.scm line 224.
@end ignore

Usage:  (string-table-add st-name str-val)
@*
Check for a duplicate string and, if none, then insert a new
string into the string table.  In all cases, returns the
character index of the beginning of the string in the table.

The returned index can be used in expressions like:
@example
string_array + <returned-value>
@end example
@noindent
that will yield the address of the first byte of the inserted
string.  See the @file{strtable.test} AutoGen test for a usage
example.

Arguments:
@*
st-name - the name of the array of characters
@*
str-val - the (possibly) new value to add

@node SCM string-table-add-ref
@subsection @file{string-table-add-ref} - Add an entry to a string table, get reference
@findex string-table-add-ref

@ignore
Generated from auto_gen.tpl line 537.
Extracted from /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/schemedef.scm line 262.
@end ignore

Usage:  (string-table-add-ref st-name str-val)
@*
Identical to string-table-add, except the value returned
is the string "st-name" '+' and the index returned by
string-table-add.

Arguments:
@*
st-name - the name of the array of characters
@*
str-val - the (possibly) new value to add

@node SCM string-table-new
@subsection @file{string-table-new} - create a string table
@findex string-table-new

@ignore
Generated from auto_gen.tpl line 537.
Extracted from /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/schemedef.scm line 131.
@end ignore

Usage:  (string-table-new st-name)
@*
This function will create an array of characters.  The companion
functions, (@xref{SCM string-table-add},
@xref{SCM string-table-add-ref}, and
@pxref{SCM emit-string-table}) will insert text and emit the
populated table.

With these functions, it should be much easier to construct
structures containing string offsets instead of string pointers.
That can be very useful when transmitting, storing or sharing data
with different address spaces.

@noindent
Here is a brief example copied from the strtable.test test:

@example
[+ (string-table-new "scribble")
   (out-push-new) ;; redirect output to temporary
   (define ct 1)  +][+

FOR str IN that was the week that was +][+
  (set! ct (+ ct 1))
+]
    [+ (string-table-add-ref "scribble" (get "str")) +],[+
ENDFOR  +]
[+ (out-suspend "main")
   (emit-string-table "scribble")
   (ag-fprintf 0 "\nchar const *ap[%d] = @{" ct)
   (out-resume "main")
   (out-pop #t) ;; now dump out the redirected output +]
    NULL @};
@end example

@noindent
Some explanation:

@noindent
I added the @code{(out-push-new)} because the string table text is
diverted into an output stream named, ``scribble'' and I want to
have the string table emitted before the string table references.
The string table references are also emitted inside the @code{FOR}
loop.  So, when the loop is done, the current output is suspended
under the name, ``main'' and the ``scribble'' table is then emitted
into the primary output.  (@code{emit-string-table} inserts its
output directly into the current output stream.  It does not need to
be the last function in an AutoGen macro block.)  Next I
@code{ag-fprintf} the array-of-pointer declaration directly into the
current output.  Finally I restore the ``main'' output stream and
@code{(out-pop #t)}-it into the main output stream.

Here is the result.  Note that duplicate strings are not repeated
in the string table:

@example
static char const scribble[18] =
    "that\0" "was\0"  "the\0"  "week\0";

char const *ap[7] = @{
    scribble+0,
    scribble+5,
    scribble+9,
    scribble+13,
    scribble+0,
    scribble+5,
    NULL @};
@end example

These functions use the global name space @code{stt-*} in addition to
the function names.

If you utilize this in your programming, it is recommended that you
prevent printf format usage warnings with the GCC option
@code{-Wno-format-contains-nul}

Arguments:
@*
st-name - the name of the array of characters

@node SCM string-table-size
@subsection @file{string-table-size} - print the current size of a string table
@findex string-table-size

@ignore
Generated from auto_gen.tpl line 537.
Extracted from /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/schemedef.scm line 311.
@end ignore

Usage:  (string-table-size st-name)
@*
Returns the current byte count of the string table.

Arguments:
@*
st-name - the name of the array of characters

@node SCM string->c-name!
@subsection @file{string->c-name!} - map non-name chars to underscore
@findex string->c-name!

@ignore
Generated from auto_gen.tpl line 537.
Extracted from /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/expGuile.c line 248.
@end ignore

Usage:  (string->c-name! str)
@*
Change all the graphic characters that are invalid in a C name token
into underscores.  Whitespace characters are ignored.  Any other
character type (i.e. non-graphic and non-white) will cause a failure.

Arguments:
@*
str - input/output string

@node SCM string->camelcase
@subsection @file{string->camelcase} - make a string be CamelCase
@findex string->camelcase

@ignore
Generated from auto_gen.tpl line 537.
Extracted from /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/expGuile.c line 463.
@end ignore

Usage:  (string->camelcase str)
@*
Capitalize the first letter of each block of letters and numbers,
and stripping out characters that are not alphanumerics.
For example, "alpha-beta0gamma" becomes "AlphaBeta0gamma".

Arguments:
@*
str - input/output string

@node SCM string-tr
@subsection @file{string-tr} - convert characters with new result
@findex string-tr

@ignore
Generated from auto_gen.tpl line 537.
Extracted from /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/expString.c line 1035.
@end ignore

Usage:  (string-tr source match translation)
@*
This is identical to @code{string-tr!}, except that it does not
over-write the previous value.

Arguments:
@*
source - string to transform
@*
match - characters to be converted
@*
translation - conversion list

@node SCM string-tr!
@subsection @file{string-tr!} - convert characters
@findex string-tr!

@ignore
Generated from auto_gen.tpl line 537.
Extracted from /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/expString.c line 964.
@end ignore

Usage:  (string-tr! source match translation)
@*
This is the same as the @code{tr(1)} program, except the
string to transform is the first argument.  The second and
third arguments are used to construct mapping arrays for the
transformation of the first argument.

It is too bad this little program has so many different
and incompatible implementations!

Arguments:
@*
source - string to transform
@*
match - characters to be converted
@*
translation - conversion list

@node SCM string-upcase
@subsection @file{string-upcase} - upper case a new string
@findex string-upcase

@ignore
Generated from auto_gen.tpl line 537.
Extracted from /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/expGuile.c line 319.
@end ignore

Usage:  (string-upcase str)
@*
Create a new SCM string containing the same text as the original,
only all the lower case letters are changed to upper case.

Arguments:
@*
str - input string

@node SCM string-upcase!
@subsection @file{string-upcase!} - make a string be upper case
@findex string-upcase!

@ignore
Generated from auto_gen.tpl line 537.
Extracted from /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/expGuile.c line 288.
@end ignore

Usage:  (string-upcase! str)
@*
Change to upper case all the characters in an SCM string.

Arguments:
@*
str - input/output string

@node SCM sub-shell-str
@subsection @file{sub-shell-str} - back quoted (sub-)shell string
@findex sub-shell-str

@ignore
Generated from auto_gen.tpl line 537.
Extracted from /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/expString.c line 854.
@end ignore

Usage:  (sub-shell-str string)
@*
This function is substantially identical to @code{shell-str}, except
that the quoting character is @code{`} and the "leave the escape alone"
character is @code{"}.

Arguments:
@*
string - string to transform

@node SCM sum
@subsection @file{sum} - sum of values in list
@findex sum

@ignore
Generated from auto_gen.tpl line 537.
Extracted from /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/expGuile.c line 206.
@end ignore

Usage:  (sum list ...)
@*
Compute the sum of the list of expressions.

Arguments:
@*
list - list of values.  Strings are converted to numbers

@node SCM time-string->number
@subsection @file{time-string->number} - duration string to seconds
@findex time-string->number

@ignore
Generated from auto_gen.tpl line 537.
Extracted from /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/expString.c line 1097.
@end ignore

Usage:  (time-string->number time_spec)
@*
Convert the argument string to a time period in seconds.
The string may use multiple parts consisting of days, hours
minutes and seconds.  These are indicated with a suffix of
@code{d}, @code{h}, @code{m} and @code{s} respectively.
Hours, minutes and seconds may also be represented with
@code{HH:MM:SS} or, without hours, as @code{MM:SS}.

Arguments:
@*
time_spec - string to parse

@node SCM version-compare
@subsection @file{version-compare} - compare two version numbers
@findex version-compare

@ignore
Generated from auto_gen.tpl line 537.
Extracted from /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/expState.c line 226.
@end ignore

Usage:  (version-compare op v1 v2)
@*
Converts v1 and v2 strings into 64 bit values and returns the
result of running 'op' on those values.  It assumes that the version
is a 1 to 4 part dot-separated series of numbers.  Suffixes like,
"5pre4" or "5-pre4" will be interpreted as two numbers.  The first
number ("5" in this case) will be decremented and the number after
the "pre" will be added to 0xC000.  (Unless your platform is unable
to support 64 bit integer arithmetic.  Then it will be added to 0xC0.)
Consequently, these yield true:
@example
(version-compare > "5.8.5"       "5.8.5-pre4")
(version-compare > "5.8.5-pre10" "5.8.5-pre4")
@end example

Arguments:
@*
op - comparison operator
@*
v1 - first version
@*
v2 - compared-to version
@ignore
START == MACROS == DO NOT CHANGE THIS COMMENT or the surrounding 'ignore's
Extraction from autogen.texi
@end ignore

@c === SECTION MARKER

@node native macros
@section AutoGen Native Macros
@cindex native macros

This section describes the various AutoGen natively defined macros.
Unlike the Scheme functions, some of these macros are "block macros"
with a scope that extends through a terminating macro.  Block macros
must not overlap.  That is to say, a block macro started within the
scope of an encompassing block macro must have its matching end macro
appear before the encompassing block macro is either ended or subdivided.

The block macros are these:

@table @code
@item CASE
This macro has scope through the @code{ESAC} macro.
The scope is subdivided by @code{SELECT} macros.
You must have at least one @code{SELECT} macro.

@item DEFINE
This macro has scope through the @code{ENDDEF} macro.  The defined
user macro can never be a block macro.  This macro is extracted from
the template @i{before} the template is processed.  Consequently, you
cannot select a definition based on context.  You can, however, place
them all at the end of the file.

@item FOR
This macro has scope through the @code{ENDFOR} macro.

@item IF
This macro has scope through the @code{ENDIF} macro.
The scope may be subdivided by @code{ELIF} and @code{ELSE}
macros.  Obviously, there may be only one @code{ELSE} macro
and it must be the last of these subdivisions.

@item INCLUDE
This macro has the scope of the included file.
It is a block macro in the sense that the included
file must not contain any incomplete block macros.

@item WHILE
This macro has scope through the @code{ENDWHILE} macro.
@end table
@ignore
END   == MACROS == DO NOT CHANGE THIS COMMENT or the surrounding 'ignore's
Extraction from autogen.texi
@end ignore
@menu
* AGMacro syntax::   AutoGen Macro Syntax
* CASE::             CASE - Select one of several template blocks
* COMMENT::          COMMENT - A block of comment to be ignored
* DEBUG::            DEBUG - Print debug message to trace output
* DEFINE::           DEFINE - Define a user AutoGen macro
* ELIF::             ELIF - Alternate Conditional Template Block
* ELSE::             ELSE - Alternate Template Block
* ENDDEF::           ENDDEF - Ends a macro definition.
* ENDFOR::           ENDFOR - Terminates the @code{FOR} function template block
* ENDIF::            ENDIF - Terminate the @code{IF} Template Block
* ENDWHILE::         ENDWHILE - Terminate the @code{WHILE} Template Block
* ESAC::             ESAC - Terminate the @code{CASE} Template Block
* EXPR::             EXPR - Evaluate and emit an Expression
* FOR::              FOR - Emit a template block multiple times
* IF::               IF - Conditionally Emit a Template Block
* INCLUDE::          INCLUDE - Read in and emit a template block
* INVOKE::           INVOKE - Invoke a User Defined Macro
* SELECT::           SELECT - Selection block for CASE function
* UNKNOWN::          UNKNOWN - Either a user macro or a value name.
* WHILE::            WHILE - Conditionally loop over a Template Block
@end menu
@node AGMacro syntax
@subsection AutoGen Macro Syntax
@cindex macro syntax

The general syntax is:

@example
[ @{ <native-macro-name> | <user-defined-name> @} ] [ <arg> ... ]
@end example

@noindent
The syntax for @code{<arg>} depends on the particular macro,
but is generally a full expression (@pxref{expression syntax}).
Here are the exceptions to that general rule:

@enumerate
@item
@code{INVOKE} macros, implicit or explicit, must be followed by
a list of name/string value pairs.  The string values are
@i{simple expressions}, as described above.

That is, the @code{INVOKE} syntax is one of these two:
@example
<user-macro-name> [ <name> [ = <expression> ] ... ]

INVOKE <name-expression> [ <name> [ = <expression> ] ... ]
@end example

@item
AutoGen FOR macros must be in one of three forms:

@example
FOR <name> [ <separator-string> ]

FOR <name> (...Scheme expression list)

FOR <name> IN <string-entry> [ ... ]
@end example
@noindent
where:
@table @samp
@item <name>
must be a simple name.
@item <separator-string>
is inserted between copies of the enclosed block.  Do not try to use ``IN''
as your separator string.  It won't work.
@item <string-entry>
is an entry in a list of strings.  ``@code{<name>}'' is assigned
each value from the ``@code{IN}'' list before expanding the @code{FOR} block.
@item (...Scheme expression list)
is expected to contain one or more of the @code{for-from},
@code{for-to}, @code{for-by}, and @code{for-sep} functions.
(@xref{FOR}, and @ref{AutoGen Functions})
@end table

The first two forms iterate over the @code{FOR} block if @code{<name>}
is found in the AutoGen values.  The last form will create the AutoGen
value named @code{<name>}.

@item
AutoGen @code{DEFINE} macros must be followed by a simple name.
Anything after that is ignored.  Consequently, that ``comment space''
may be used to document any named values the macro expects to have
set up as arguments.  @xref{DEFINE}.

@item
The AutoGen @code{COMMENT}, @code{ELSE}, @code{ESAC} and the @code{END*}
macros take no arguments and ignore everything after the macro name
(e.g. see @ref{COMMENT})
@end enumerate

@node CASE
@subsection CASE - Select one of several template blocks

@ignore
Generated from auto_gen.tpl line 537.
Extracted from /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/funcCase.c line 860.
@end ignore

@findex CASE

The arguments are evaluated and converted to a string, if necessary.  A
simple name will be interpreted as an AutoGen value name and its value will
be used by the @code{SELECT} macros (see the example below and the
expression evaluation function, @pxref{EXPR}).  The scope of the macro is
up to the matching @code{ESAC} macro.  Within the scope of a @code{CASE},
this string is matched against case selection macros.  There are sixteen
match macros that are derived from four different ways matches may be
performed, plus an "always true", "true if the AutoGen value was found",
and "true if no AutoGen value was found" matches.  The codes for the
nineteen match macros are formed as follows:

@enumerate
@item
Must the match start matching from the beginning of the string?
If not, then the match macro code starts with an asterisk (@code{*}).
@item
Must the match finish matching at the end of the string?
If not, then the match macro code ends with an asterisk (@code{*}).
@item
Is the match a pattern match or a string comparison?
If a comparison, use an equal sign (@code{=}).
If a pattern match, use a tilde (@code{~}).
@item
Is the match case sensitive?
If alphabetic case is important, double the tilde or equal sign.
@item
Do you need a default match when none of the others match?
Use a single asterisk (@code{*}).
@item
Do you need to distinguish between an empty string value and a value
that was not found?  Use the non-existence test (@code{!E}) before
testing a full match against an empty string (@code{== ''}).
There is also an existence test (@code{+E}), more for symmetry than
for practical use.
@end enumerate

@noindent
For example:

@example
[+ CASE <full-expression> +]
[+ ~~*  "[Tt]est" +]reg exp must match at start, not at end
[+ ==   "TeSt"    +]a full-string, case sensitive compare
[+ =    "TEST"    +]a full-string, case insensitive compare
[+ !E             +]not exists - matches if no AutoGen value found
[+ ==   ""        +]expression yielded a zero-length string
[+ +E             +]exists - matches if there is any value result
[+ *              +]always match - no testing
[+ ESAC +]
@end example

@code{<full-expression>} (@pxref{expression syntax}) may be any expression,
including the use of apply-codes and value-names.  If the expression yields
a number, it is converted to a decimal string.

These case selection codes have also been implemented as
Scheme expression functions using the same codes.  They are documented
in this texi doc as ``string-*?'' predicates (@pxref{Common Functions}).

@node COMMENT
@subsection COMMENT - A block of comment to be ignored

@ignore
Generated from auto_gen.tpl line 537.
Extracted from /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/functions.c line 212.
@end ignore

@findex COMMENT

This function can be specified by the user, but there will
never be a situation where it will be invoked at emit time.
The macro is actually removed from the internal representation.

If the native macro name code is @code{#}, then the
entire macro function is treated as a comment and ignored.

@example
[+ # say what you want, but no '+' before any ']' chars +]
@end example

@node DEBUG
@subsection DEBUG - Print debug message to trace output

@ignore
Generated from auto_gen.tpl line 537.
Extracted from /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/funcDef.c line 373.
@end ignore

@findex DEBUG

If the tracing level is at "debug-message" or above
(@pxref{autogen trace}), this macro prints a debug message to trace
output.  This message is not evaluated.  This macro can also be used to
set useful debugger breakpoints.  By inserting [+DEBUG n+] into your
template, you can set a debugger breakpoint on the #n case element
below (in the AutoGen source) and step through the processing of
interesting parts of your template.

To be useful, you have to have access to the source tree where autogen
was built and the template being processed.  The definitions are also
helpful, but not crucial.  Please contact the author if you think you
might actually want to use this.

@node DEFINE
@subsection DEFINE - Define a user AutoGen macro

@ignore
Generated from auto_gen.tpl line 537.
Extracted from /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/funcDef.c line 518.
@end ignore

@findex DEFINE
@cindex define macro

This function will define a new macro.  You must provide a name for the
macro.  You do not specify any arguments, though the invocation may
specify a set of name/value pairs that are to be active during the
processing of the macro.

@example
[+ define foo +]
... macro body with macro functions ...
[+ enddef +]
... [+ foo bar='raw text' baz=<<text expression>> +]
@end example

Once the macro has been defined, this new macro can be invoked by
specifying the macro name as the first token after the start macro marker.
Alternatively, you may make the invocation explicitly invoke a defined
macro by specifying @code{INVOKE} (@pxref{INVOKE}) in the macro
invocation.  If you do that, the macro name can be computed with an
expression that gets evaluated every time the INVOKE macro is encountered.

Any remaining text in the macro invocation will be used to create new
name/value pairs that only persist for the duration of the processing of
the macro.  The expressions are evaluated the same way basic
expressions are evaluated.  @xref{expression syntax}.

The resulting definitions are handled much like regular
definitions, except:

@enumerate
@item
The values may not be compound.  That is, they may not contain
nested name/value pairs.
@item
The bindings go away when the macro is complete.
@item
The name/value pairs are separated by whitespace instead of
semi-colons.
@item
Sequences of strings are not concatenated.
@end enumerate

@quotation
@strong{NB:} The macro is extracted from the template as the template is
scanned.  You cannot conditionally define a macro by enclosing it in an
@code{IF}/@code{ENDIF} (@pxref{IF}) macro pair.  If you need to dynamically
select the format of a @code{DEFINE}d macro, then put the flavors into
separate template files that simply define macros.  @code{INCLUDE}
(@pxref{INCLUDE}) the appropriate template when you have computed which
you need.
@end quotation

Due to this, it is acceptable and even a good idea to place all the
@code{DEFINE} macros at the end of the template.  That puts the main
body of the template at the beginning of the file.

@node ELIF
@subsection ELIF - Alternate Conditional Template Block

@ignore
Generated from auto_gen.tpl line 537.
Extracted from /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/funcIf.c line 256.
@end ignore

@findex ELIF

This macro must only appear after an @code{IF} function, and
before any associated @code{ELSE} or @code{ENDIF} functions.
It denotes the start of an alternate template block for the
@code{IF} function.  Its expression argument is evaluated as are
the arguments to @code{IF}.  For a complete description @xref{IF}.

@node ELSE
@subsection ELSE - Alternate Template Block

@ignore
Generated from auto_gen.tpl line 537.
Extracted from /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/funcIf.c line 284.
@end ignore

@findex ELSE

This macro must only appear after an @code{IF} function,
and before the associated @code{ENDIF} function.
It denotes the start of an alternate template block for
the @code{IF} function.  For a complete description @xref{IF}.

@node ENDDEF
@subsection ENDDEF - Ends a macro definition.

@ignore
Generated from auto_gen.tpl line 537.
Extracted from /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/funcDef.c line 582.
@end ignore

@findex ENDDEF

This macro ends the @code{DEFINE} function template block.
For a complete description @xref{DEFINE}.

@node ENDFOR
@subsection ENDFOR - Terminates the @code{FOR} function template block

@ignore
Generated from auto_gen.tpl line 537.
Extracted from /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/funcFor.c line 665.
@end ignore

@findex ENDFOR

This macro ends the @code{FOR} function template block.
For a complete description @xref{FOR}.

@node ENDIF
@subsection ENDIF - Terminate the @code{IF} Template Block

@ignore
Generated from auto_gen.tpl line 537.
Extracted from /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/funcIf.c line 132.
@end ignore

@findex ENDIF

This macro ends the @code{IF} function template block.
For a complete description @xref{IF}.

@node ENDWHILE
@subsection ENDWHILE - Terminate the @code{WHILE} Template Block

@ignore
Generated from auto_gen.tpl line 537.
Extracted from /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/funcIf.c line 215.
@end ignore

@findex ENDWHILE

This macro ends the @code{WHILE} function template block.
For a complete description @xref{WHILE}.

@node ESAC
@subsection ESAC - Terminate the @code{CASE} Template Block

@ignore
Generated from auto_gen.tpl line 537.
Extracted from /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/funcCase.c line 927.
@end ignore

@findex ESAC

This macro ends the @code{CASE} function template block.
For a complete description, @xref{CASE}.

@node EXPR
@subsection EXPR - Evaluate and emit an Expression

@ignore
Generated from auto_gen.tpl line 537.
Extracted from /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/funcEval.c line 447.
@end ignore

@findex EXPR

This macro does not have a name to cause it to be invoked
explicitly, though if a macro starts with one of the apply codes
or one of the simple expression markers, then an expression
macro is inferred.  The result of the expression evaluation
(@pxref{expression syntax}) is written to the current output.

@node FOR
@subsection FOR - Emit a template block multiple times

@ignore
Generated from auto_gen.tpl line 537.
Extracted from /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/funcFor.c line 586.
@end ignore

@findex FOR
@cindex looping, for
@cindex for loop

This macro has a slight variation on the standard syntax:
@example
FOR <value-name> [ <separator-string> ]

FOR <value-name> (...Scheme expression list)

FOR <value-name> IN "string" [ ... ]
@end example

Other than for the last form, the first macro argument must be the name of
an AutoGen value.  If there is no value associated with the name, the
@code{FOR} template block is skipped entirely.  The scope of the @code{FOR}
macro extends to the corresponding @code{ENDFOR} macro.  The last form will
create an array of string values named @code{<value-name>} that only exists
within the context of this @code{FOR} loop.  With this form, in order to
use a @code{separator-string}, you must code it into the end of the
template block using the @code{(last-for?)} predicate function
(@pxref{SCM last-for?}).

If there are any arguments after the @code{value-name}, the initial
characters are used to determine the form.  If the first character is
either a semi-colon (@code{;}) or an opening parenthesis (@code{(}), then
it is presumed to be a Scheme expression containing the FOR macro specific
functions @code{for-from}, @code{for-by}, @code{for-to}, and/or
@code{for-sep}.  @xref{AutoGen Functions}.  If it consists of an '@code{i}'
an '@code{n}' and separated by white space from more text, then the
@code{FOR x IN} form is processed.  Otherwise, the remaining text is
presumed to be a string for inserting between each iteration of the loop.
This string will be emitted one time less than the number of iterations of
the loop.  That is, it is emitted after each loop, excepting for the last
iteration.

If the from/by/to functions are invoked, they will specify which copies of
the named value are to be processed.  If there is no copy of the named
value associated with a particular index, the @code{FOR} template block
will be instantiated anyway.  The template must use methods for detecting
missing definitions and emitting default text.  In this fashion, you can
insert entries from a sparse or non-zero based array into a dense, zero
based array.

@strong{NB:} the @code{for-from}, @code{for-to}, @code{for-by} and
@code{for-sep} functions are disabled outside of the context of the
@code{FOR} macro.  Likewise, the @code{first-for}, @code{last-for}
and @code{for-index} functions are disabled outside of the range
of a @code{FOR} block.

@strong{Also:} the @code{<value-name>} must be a single level name,
not a compound name (@pxref{naming values}).

@example
[+FOR var (for-from 0) (for-to <number>) (for-sep ",") +]
... text with @code{var}ious substitutions ...[+
ENDFOR var+]
@end example

@noindent
this will repeat the @code{... text with @code{var}ious
substitutions ...} <number>+1 times.  Each repetition,
except for the last, will have a comma @code{,} after it.

@example
[+FOR var ",\n" +]
... text with @code{var}ious substitutions ...[+
ENDFOR var +]
@end example

@noindent
This will do the same thing, but only for the index
values of @code{var} that have actually been defined.

@node IF
@subsection IF - Conditionally Emit a Template Block

@ignore
Generated from auto_gen.tpl line 537.
Extracted from /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/funcIf.c line 96.
@end ignore

@findex IF
@cindex conditional emit
@cindex if test

Conditional block.  Its arguments are evaluated (@pxref{EXPR}) and
if the result is non-zero or a string with one or more bytes,
then the condition is true and the text from that point
until a matched @code{ELIF}, @code{ELSE} or @code{ENDIF} is emitted.
@code{ELIF} introduces a conditional alternative if the @code{IF}
clause evaluated FALSE and @code{ELSE} introduces an unconditional
alternative.

@example
[+IF <full-expression> +]
emit things that are for the true condition[+

ELIF <full-expression-2> +]
emit things that are true maybe[+

ELSE "This may be a comment" +]
emit this if all but else fails[+

ENDIF "This may *also* be a comment" +]
@end example

@noindent
@code{<full-expression>} may be any expression described in the
@code{EXPR} expression function, including the use of apply-codes
and value-names.  If the expression yields an empty string, it
is interpreted as @i{false}.

@node INCLUDE
@subsection INCLUDE - Read in and emit a template block

@ignore
Generated from auto_gen.tpl line 537.
Extracted from /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/functions.c line 26.
@end ignore

@findex INCLUDE

The entire contents of the named file is inserted at this point.
The contents of the file are processed for macro expansion.  The
arguments are eval-ed, so you may compute the name of the file to
be included.  The included file must not contain any incomplete
function blocks.  Function blocks are template text beginning with
any of the macro functions @samp{CASE}, @samp{DEFINE}, @samp{FOR},
@samp{IF} and @samp{WHILE}; extending through their respective
terminating macro functions.

@node INVOKE
@subsection INVOKE - Invoke a User Defined Macro

@ignore
Generated from auto_gen.tpl line 537.
Extracted from /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/funcDef.c line 656.
@end ignore

@findex INVOKE

User defined macros may be invoked explicitly or implicitly.
If you invoke one implicitly, the macro must begin with the
name of the defined macro.  Consequently, this may @strong{not}
be a computed value.  If you explicitly invoke a user defined macro,
the macro begins with the macro name @code{INVOKE} followed by
a @i{basic expression} that must yield a known user defined macro.
A macro name _must_ be found, or AutoGen will issue a diagnostic
and exit.

Arguments are passed to the invoked macro by name.
The text following the macro name must consist of a series of
names each of which is followed by an equal sign (@code{=}) and
a @i{basic expression} that yields a string.

The string values may contain template macros that are parsed
the first time the macro is processed and evaluated again every
time the macro is evaluated.

@node SELECT
@subsection SELECT - Selection block for CASE function

@ignore
Generated from auto_gen.tpl line 537.
Extracted from /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/funcCase.c line 1148.
@end ignore

@findex SELECT

This macro selects a block of text by matching an expression
against the sample text expression evaluated in the @code{CASE}
macro.  @xref{CASE}.

You do not specify a @code{SELECT} macro with the word ``select''.
Instead, you must use one of the 19 match operators described in
the @code{CASE} macro description.

@node UNKNOWN
@subsection UNKNOWN - Either a user macro or a value name.

@ignore
Generated from auto_gen.tpl line 537.
Extracted from /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/functions.c line 106.
@end ignore

@findex UNKNOWN

The macro text has started with a name not known to AutoGen.  If, at run
time, it turns out to be the name of a defined macro, then that macro is
invoked.  If it is not, then it is a conditional expression that is
evaluated only if the name is defined at the time the macro is invoked.

You may not specify @code{UNKNOWN} explicitly.

@node WHILE
@subsection WHILE - Conditionally loop over a Template Block

@ignore
Generated from auto_gen.tpl line 537.
Extracted from /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/agen5/funcIf.c line 188.
@end ignore

@findex WHILE
@cindex conditional emit
@cindex while test

Conditionally repeated block.  Its arguments are evaluated (@pxref{EXPR})
and as long as the result is non-zero or a string with one or more bytes,
then the condition is true and the text from that point
until a matched @code{ENDWHILE} is emitted.

@example
[+WHILE <full-expression> +]
emit things that are for the true condition[+

ENDWHILE +]
@end example

@noindent
@code{<full-expression>} may be any expression described in the
@code{EXPR} expression function, including the use of apply-codes
and value-names.  If the expression yields an empty string, it
is interpreted as @i{false}.
@ignore
START == AUGMENTING == DO NOT CHANGE THIS COMMENT or the surrounding 'ignore's
Extraction from autogen.texi
@end ignore

@c === SECTION MARKER

@node output controls
@section Redirecting Output
@cindex Redirecting Output
@cindex diversion

AutoGen provides a means for redirecting the template output to different
files or, in @file{M4} parlance, to various diversions.  It is accomplished
by providing a set of Scheme functions named @code{out-*}
(@pxref{AutoGen Functions}).

@table @samp
@item out-push-new (@pxref{SCM out-push-new})
This allows you to logically "push" output files onto a stack.
If you supply a string name, then a file by that name is created
to hold the output.  If you do not supply a name, then the text is
written to a scratch pad and retrieved by passing a ``@code{#t}'' argument
to the @code{out-pop} (@pxref{SCM out-pop}) function.

@item out-pop (@pxref{SCM out-pop})
This function closes the current output file and resumes output to the next
one in the stack.  At least one output must have been pushed onto the output
stack with the @code{out-push-new} (@pxref{SCM out-push-new}) function.  If
``@code{#t}'' is passed in as an argument, then the entire contents of the
diversion (or file) is returned.

@item out-suspend (@pxref{SCM out-suspend})
This function does not close the current output, but instead sets it aside
for resumption by the given name with @code{out-resume}.  The current output
must have been pushed on the output queue with @code{out-push-new}
(@pxref{SCM out-push-new}).

@item out-resume (@pxref{SCM out-resume})
This will put a named file descriptor back onto the top of
stack so that it becomes the current output again.

@item out-switch (@pxref{SCM out-switch})
This closes the current output and creates a new file,
purging any preexisting one.  This is a shortcut for "pop"
followed by "push", but this can also be done at the base level.

@item out-move (@pxref{SCM out-move})
Renames the current output file without closing it.
@end table

There are also several functions for determining the output
status.  @xref{AutoGen Functions}.

@ignore

* * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * *

@end ignore

@page
@node Augmenting AutoGen
@chapter Augmenting AutoGen Features
@cindex Augmenting AutoGen

AutoGen was designed to be simple to enhance.  You can do it by
providing shell commands, Guile/Scheme macros or callout functions
that can be invoked as a Guile macro.  Here is how you do these.

@menu
* shell commands::       Shell Output Commands
* guile macros::         Guile Macros
* guile callouts::       Guile Callout Functions
* AutoGen macros::       AutoGen Macros
@end menu

@c === SECTION MARKER

@node shell commands
@section Shell Output Commands

Shell commands are run inside of a server process.  This means that,
unlike @file{make}, context is kept from one command to the next.
Consequently, you can define a shell function in one place inside of
your template and invoke it in another.  You may also store values
in shell variables for later reference.  If you load functions from
a file containing shell functions, they will remain until AutoGen exits.

If your shell script should determine that AutoGen should stop
processing, the recommended method for stopping AutoGen is:
@example
die "some error text"
@end example

@noindent
That is a shell function added by AutoGen.  It will send a SIGTERM
to autogen and exit from the "persistent" shell.

@c === SECTION MARKER

@node guile macros
@section Guile Macros

Guile also maintains context from one command to the next.  This means you may
define functions and variables in one place and reference them elsewhere.
You also may load Guile macro definitions from a Scheme file by using the
@code{--load-scheme} command line option (@pxref{autogen load-scheme}).
Beware, however, that the AutoGen specific scheme functions have not been
loaded at this time, so though you may define functions that reference them,
do not invoke the AutoGen functions at this time.

If your Scheme script should determine that AutoGen should stop
processing, the recommended method for stopping AutoGen is:
@example
(error "some error text")
@end example

@c === SECTION MARKER

@node guile callouts
@section Guile Callout Functions

Callout functions must be registered with Guile to work.  This can
be accomplished either by putting your routines into a shared library
that contains a @code{void scm_init( void )} routine that registers
these routines, or by building them into AutoGen.

To build them into AutoGen, you must place your routines in the source
directory and name the files @file{exp*.c}.  You also must have a stylized
comment that @file{getdefs} can find that conforms to the following:

@example
/*=gfunc <function-name>
 *
 *  what:    <short one-liner>
 *  general_use:
 *  string:  <invocation-name-string>
 *  exparg:  <name>, <description> [, ['optional'] [, 'list']]
 *  doc:     A long description telling people how to use
 *           this function.
=*/
SCM
ag_scm_<function-name>( SCM arg_name[, ...] )
@{ <code> @}
@end example

@table @samp
@item gfunc
You must have this exactly thus.

@item <function-name>
This must follow C syntax for variable names

@item <short one-liner>
This should be about a half a line long.
It is used as a subsection title in this document.

@item general_use:
You must supply this unless you are an AutoGen maintainer and are writing
a function that queries or modifies the state of AutoGen.

@item <invocation-name-string>
Normally, the @code{function-name} string will be transformed into
a reasonable invocation name.  However, that is not always true.
If the result does not suit your needs, then supply an alternate string.

@item exparg:
You must supply one for each argument to your function.
All optional arguments must be last.
The last of the optional arguments may be a list, if you choose.

@item doc:
Please say something meaningful.

@item [, ...]
Do not actually specify an ANSI ellipsis here.  You must provide
for all the arguments you specified with @code{exparg}.
@end table

See the Guile documentation for more details.
More information is also available in a large comment at the
beginning of the @file{agen5/snarf.tpl} template file.

@c === SECTION MARKER

@node AutoGen macros
@section AutoGen Macros

There are two kinds@:  those you define yourself and AutoGen native.
The user-defined macros may be defined in your templates or loaded
with the @code{--lib-template} option
(See @ref{DEFINE} and  @ref{autogen lib-template}).

As for AutoGen native macros, do not add any. It is easy to do, but I
won't like it.  The basic functions needed to accomplish looping over
and selecting blocks of text have proved to be sufficient over a period
of several years.  New text transformations can be easily added via any
of the AutoGen extension methods, as discussed above.

@ignore
END   == AUGMENTING == DO NOT CHANGE THIS COMMENT or the surrounding 'ignore's
Extraction from autogen.texi
@end ignore
@ignore

Invocation section from invoke-autogen.texi

@end ignore
@page

@include invoke-autogen.texi

@ignore
START == INSTALLATION == DO NOT CHANGE THIS COMMENT or the surrounding 'ignore's
Extraction from autogen.texi
@end ignore

@page
@node Installation
@chapter Configuring and Installing

@menu
* configuring::    Configuring AutoGen
* AutoGen CGI::    AutoGen as a CGI server
* signal names::   Signal Names
* installing::     Installing AutoGen
@end menu

@c === SECTION MARKER

@node configuring
@section Configuring AutoGen
@cindex configuring

AutoGen is configured and built using Libtool, Automake and Autoconf.
Consequently, you can install it wherever you wish using the various
@samp{--prefix} options.  To the various configuration options supplied
by these tools, AutoGen adds a few of its own:

@table @samp
@item --disable-shell
AutoGen is now capable of acting as a CGI forms server, @xref{AutoGen CGI}.
As such, it will gather its definitions using either @samp{GET} or
@samp{POST} methods.  All you need to do is have a template named
@file{cgi.tpl} handy or specify a different one with a command line
option.

However, doing this without disabling the server shell brings
considerable risk.  If you were to pass user input to a script
that contained, say, the classic "@samp{`rm -rf /`}", you might have
a problem.  This configuration option will cause shell template
commands to simply return the command string as the result.
No mistakes.  Much safer.  Strongly recommended.
The default is to have server shell scripting enabled.

Disabling the shell will have some build side effects, too.

@itemize @bullet
@item
Many of the make check tests will fail, since they assume
a working server shell.
@item
The getdefs and columns programs are not built.
The options are distributed as definition files and they
cannot be expanded with a shell-disabled AutoGen.
@item
Similarly, the documentation cannot be regenerated because
the documentation templates depend on subshell functionality.
@end itemize

@item --enable-debug
Turning on AutoGen debugging enables very detailed inspection of
the input definitions and monitoring shell script processing.
These options are not particularly useful to anyone not directly
involved in maintaining AutoGen.  If you do choose to enable AutoGen
debugging, be aware that the usage page was generated without these
options, so when the build process reaches the documentation rebuild,
there will be a failure.  @samp{cd} into the @file{agen5} build
directory, @samp{make} the @samp{autogen.texi} file and all will
be well thereafter.

@item --with-regex-header
@itemx --with-header-path
@itemx --with-regex-lib
These three work together to specify how to compile with and link to
a particular POSIX regular expression library.  The value for
@file{--with-regex-header=value} must be the name of the relevant header
file.  The AutoGen sources will attempt to include that source with
a @code{#include <value>} C preprocessing statement.  The @code{path} from the
@file{--with-header-path=path} will be added to @code{CPPFLAGS} as @file{-Ipath}.
The @code{lib-specs} from @file{--with-regex-lib=lib-specs} will be added
to @code{LDFLAGS} without any adornment.
@end table

@c === SECTION MARKER

@page
@node AutoGen CGI
@section AutoGen as a CGI server

AutoGen is now capable of acting as a CGI forms server.
It behaves as a CGI server if the definitions input is from stdin
and the environment variable @code{REQUEST_METHOD} is defined
and set to either "GET" or "POST".  If set to anything else,
AutoGen will exit with a failure message.  When set to one of those
values, the CGI data will be converted to AutoGen definitions
(@pxref{Definitions File}) and the template named "@code{cgi.tpl}"
will be processed.

This works by including the name of the real template to process
in the form data and having the "@code{cgi.tpl}" template include
that template for processing.  I do this for processing the form
@url{http://autogen.sourceforge.net/conftest.html}.  The "@code{cgi.tpl}"
looks approximately like this:

@example
<? AutoGen5 Template ?>
<?
IF (not (exist? "template"))                       ?><?
  form-error                                       ?><?

ELIF (=* (get "template") "/")                     ?><?
  form-error                                       ?><?

ELIF (define tpl-file (string-append "cgi-tpl/"
                      (get "template")))
     (access? tpl-file R_OK)                       ?><?
  INCLUDE (. tpl-file)                             ?><?

ELIF (set! tpl-file (string-append tpl-file ".tpl"))
     (access? tpl-file R_OK)                       ?><?
  INCLUDE (. tpl-file)                             ?><?

ELSE                                               ?><?
  form-error                                       ?><?
ENDIF                                              ?>
@end example

@noindent
This forces the template to be found in the "@code{cgi-tpl/}"
directory.  Note also that there is no suffix specified in the
pseudo macro (@pxref{pseudo macro}).  That tells AutoGen to emit
the output to @file{stdout}.

The output is actually spooled until it is complete so that,
in the case of an error, the output can be discarded and a proper
error message can be written in its stead.

@strong{Please also note} that it is advisable, @emph{especially} for network
accessible machines, to configure AutoGen (@pxref{configuring}) with
shell processing disabled (@code{--disable-shell}).  That will make it
impossible for any referenced template to hand data to a subshell for
interpretation.

@c === SECTION MARKER

@node signal names
@section Signal Names
@cindex Signal Names

When AutoGen is first built, it tries to use @code{psignal(3)},
@code{sys_siglist}, @code{strsigno(3)} and @code{strsignal(3)} from the
host operating system.  If your system does not supply these, the
AutoGen distribution will.  However, it will use the distributed mapping
and this mapping is unlikely to match what your system uses.  This can
be fixed.  Once you have installed autogen, the mapping can be rebuilt
on the host operating system.  To do so, you must perform the
following steps:

@enumerate
@item
Build and install AutoGen in a place where it will be found in your
search path.

@item
@code{cd $@{top_srcdir@}/compat}

@item
@code{autogen strsignal.def}

@item
Verify the results by examining the @file{strsignal.h} file produced.

@item
Re-build and re-install AutoGen.
@end enumerate

If you have any problems or peculiarities that cause this process to
fail on your platform, please send me copies of the header files
containing the signal names and numbers, along with the full path names
of these files.  I will endeavor to fix it.  There is a shell script
inside of @file{strsignal.def} that tries to hunt down the information.

@c === SECTION MARKER

@node installing
@section Installing AutoGen
@cindex Installing

There are several files that get installed.  The number depend
whether or not both shared and archive libraries are to be
installed.  The following assumes that everything is installed
relative to @code{$prefix}.  You can, of course, use
@code{configure} to place these files where you wish.

@strong{NB}@:  AutoGen does not contain any compiled-in path names.
All support directories are located via option processing,
the environment variable @code{HOME} or finding the directory where
the executable came from.

The installed files are:

@enumerate
@item
The executables in @file{bin} (autogen, getdefs and columns).

@item
The AutoOpts link libraries as @file{lib/libopts.*}.

@item
An include file in @file{include/options.h}, needed for
Automated Option Processing (see next chapter).

@item
Several template files and a scheme script in @file{share/autogen}, needed
for Automated Option Processing (@pxref{AutoOpts}), parsing definitions
written with scheme syntax (@pxref{Dynamic Text}), the templates for
producing documentation for your program (@pxref{documentation attributes}),
autoconf test macros, and AutoFSM.

@item
Info-style help files as @file{info/autogen.info*}.
These files document AutoGen, the option processing
library AutoOpts, and several add-on components.

@item
The three man pages for the three executables are installed in man/man1.
@end enumerate

This program, library and supporting files can be installed
with three commands:

@itemize @bullet
@item
<src-dir>/configure [ <configure-options> ]
@item
make
@item
make install
@end itemize

However, you may wish to insert @code{make check}
before the @code{make install} command.

If you do perform a @code{make check} and there are any failures, you
will find the results in @code{<module>/test/FAILURES}.  Needless to say, I
would be interested in seeing the contents of those files and any
associated messages.  If you choose to go on and analyze one of these
failures, you will need to invoke the test scripts individually.  You
may do so by specifying the test (or list of test) in the TESTS make
variable, thus:

@example
gmake TESTS=test-name.test check
@end example

I specify @code{gmake} because most makes will not let you override
internal definitions with command line arguments.  @code{gmake} does.

All of the AutoGen tests are written to honor the contents of the
@t{VERBOSE} environment variable.  Normally, any commentary generated
during a test run is discarded unless the @t{VERBOSE} environment
variable is set.  So, to see what is happening during the test, you
might invoke the following with @i{bash} or @i{ksh}:

@example
VERBOSE=1 gmake TESTS="for.test forcomma.test" check
@end example

@noindent
Or equivalently with @i{csh}:

@example
env VERBOSE=1 gmake TESTS="for.test forcomma.test" check
@end example

@ignore
END   == INSTALLATION == DO NOT CHANGE THIS COMMENT or the surrounding 'ignore's
Extraction from autogen.texi
@end ignore@page
@node AutoOpts
@chapter Automated Option Processing
@cindex autoopts

AutoOpts 36.3 is bundled with AutoGen.  It is a tool that virtually eliminates the
hassle of processing options and keeping man pages, info docs and usage text
up to date.  This package allows you to specify several program attributes, up
to a hundred option types and many option attributes.  From this, it then
produces all the code necessary to parse and handle the command line and
configuration file options, and the documentation that should go with your
program as well.
@ignore
START == AUTOOPTS == DO NOT CHANGE THIS COMMENT or the surrounding 'ignore's
Extraction from autogen.texi
@end ignore

All the features notwithstanding, some applications simply have
well-established command line interfaces.  Even still, those programs
may use the configuration file parsing portion of the library.
See the ``AutoOpts Features'' and ``Configuration File Format'' sections.

@menu
* Features::            AutoOpts Features
* Licensing::           AutoOpts Licensing
* Caveats::             Developer and User Notes
* Quick Start::         Quick Start
* Option Definitions::  Option Definitions
* AutoOpts API::        Programmatic Interface
* Multi-Threading::     Multi-Threading
* option descriptor::   Option Descriptor File
* Using AutoOpts::      Using AutoOpts
* Presetting Options::  Configuring your program
* Config File Format::  Configuration File Format
* shell options::       AutoOpts for Shell Scripts
* AutoInfo::            Automated Info Docs
* AutoMan pages::       Automated Man Pages
* getopt_long::         Using getopt(3C)
* i18n::                Internationalizing AutoOpts
* Naming Conflicts::    Naming Conflicts
* All Attribute Names:: All Attribute Names
* Option Define Names:: Option Definition Name Index
@end menu

@c === SECTION MARKER

@node Features
@section AutoOpts Features
@cindex features

AutoOpts supports option processing; option state saving; and
program documentation with innumerable features.  Here, we list
a few obvious ones and some important ones, but the full list is
really defined by all the attributes defined in the @ref{Option Definitions}
section.

@enumerate
@item
POSIX-compliant short (flag) option processing.

@item
GNU-style long options processing.  Long options
are recognized without case sensitivity, and they may be abbreviated.

@item
Environment variable initializations, @xref{environrc}.

@item
Initialization from configuration files (aka RC or INI files), and
saving the option state back into one, @xref{loading rcfile}.

@item
Config files may be partitioned.  One config file may be used by several
programs by partitioning it with lines containing,
``@code{[PROGRAM_NAME]}'' or ``@code{<?program-name>}'', @xref{loading rcfile}.

@item
Config files may contain AutoOpts directives.
``@code{<?auto-options [[option-text]]>}'' may be used to set @code{AutoOpts}
option processing options.  Viz., @code{GNU} usage layout versus @code{AutoOpts}
conventional layout, and @code{misuse-usage} versus @code{no-misuse-usage},
@xref{usage attributes}.

@item
Options may be marked as @code{@i{dis}-abled} with a disablement prefix.
Such options may default to either an enabled or a disabled state.  You
may also provide an enablement prefix, too, e.g., @code{--allow-mumble}
and @code{--prevent-mumble} (@pxref{Common Attributes}).

@item
Verify that required options are present between the minimum and maximum
number of times on the command line.  Verify that conflicting options do not
appear together.  Verify that options requiring the presence of other options
are, in fact, used in the presence of other options.
See @xref{Common Attributes}, and @xref{Option Conflict Attributes}.

@item
There are several @ref{automatic options, automatically supported options}.
They will have short flags if any options have option flags and the flags
are not suppressed.  The associated flag may be altered or suppressed by
specifying no value or an alternate character for ``@code{xxx-value;}'' in
the option definition file.  ``@code{xxx}'' is the name of the option below:

@table @samp
@item --help
@itemx --more-help
These are always available.  @samp{--more-help} will pass the full usage
text through a pager.
@item --usage
@vindex usage-opt
This is added to the option list if @code{usage-opt} is specified.
It yields the abbreviated usage to @file{stdout}.
@item --version
This is added to the option list if @code{version = xxx;} is specified.
@item --load-opts
@itemx --save-opts
These are added to the option list if @code{homerc} is specified.  Mostly.
If, @code{disable-save} is specified, then @samp{--save-opts} is disabled.
@end table

@item
Various forms of main procedures can be added to the output,
@xref{Generated main}.  There are four basic forms:

@enumerate a
@item
A program that processes the arguments and writes to standard out
portable shell commands containing the digested options.

@item
A program that will generate portable shell commands to parse the defined
options.  The expectation is that this result will be copied into a
shell script and used there.

@item
A ``for-each'' main that will invoke a named function once for either
each non-option argument on the command line or, if there are none,
then once for each non-blank, non-comment input line read from stdin.

@item
A main procedure of your own design.  Its code can be supplied in the
option description template or by incorporating another template.
@end enumerate

@item
There are several methods for handling option arguments.
@itemize @bullet
@item
nothing (@pxref{OPT_ARG}) option argument strings are globally available.
@item
user supplied (@pxref{Option Argument Handling})
@item
stack option arguments (@pxref{Option Argument Handling})
@item
integer numbers (@pxref{arg-type number})
@item
true or false valued (@pxref{arg-type boolean})
@item
enumerated list of names (@pxref{arg-type keyword})
@item
an enumeration (membership) set (@pxref{arg-type set membership})
@item
a list of name/value pairs (option ``subopts'') (@pxref{arg-type hierarchy})
@item
a time duration or a specific time and date
@item
validated file name (@pxref{arg-type file name})
@item
optional option argument (@pxref{arg-optional})
@end itemize

@item
The generated usage text can be emitted in either AutoOpts standard
format (maximizing the information about each option), or GNU-ish
normal form.  The default form is selected by either specifying or not
specifying the @code{gnu-usage} attribute (@pxref{information attributes}).
This can be overridden by the user himself with the
@code{AUTOOPTS_USAGE} environment variable.  If it exists and is set
to the string @code{gnu}, it will force GNU-ish style format; if it is
set to the string @code{autoopts}, it will force AutoOpts standard
format; otherwise, it will have no effect.

@item
The usage text and many other strings are stored in a single character array
(@pxref{SCM string-table-new,string table functions}).  This reduces fixup
costs when loading the program or library.  The downside is that if GCC
detects that any of these strings are used in a printf format, you may get
the warning, @code{embedded '\0' in format}.  To eliminate the warning, you
must provide GCC with the @code{-Wno-format-contains-nul} option.

@item
If you compile with @code{ENABLE_NLS} defined and @code{_()} defined to
a localization function such as @code{gettext(3GNU)}, then the option
processing code will be localizable (@pxref{i18n}).

@item
Provides a callable routine to parse
a text string as if it were from one of the rc/ini/config files,
hereafter referred to as a configuration file.

@item
By adding a @samp{doc} and @samp{arg-name} attributes to each option,
AutoGen will also be able to produce a man page and the @samp{invoking}
section of a texinfo document.

@item
Intermingled option processing.  AutoOpts options may be intermingled with
command line operands and options processed with other parsing techniques.
This is accomplished by setting the @code{allow-errors}
(@pxref{program attributes}) attribute.  When processing reaches a point
where @code{optionProcess} (@pxref{libopts-optionProcess}) needs to be called
again, the current option can be set with @code{RESTART_OPT(n)}
(@pxref{RESTART_OPT}) before calling @code{optionProcess}.

See: @xref{library attributes}.

@item
Library suppliers can specify command line options that their
client programs will accept.  They specify option definitions
that get @code{#include}-d into the client option definitions
and they specify an "anchor" option that has a callback and must be invoked.
That will give the library access to the option state for their options.

@item
library options.  An AutoOpt-ed library may export its options for use in
an AutoOpt-ed program.  This is done by providing an option definition file
that client programs @code{#include} into their own option definitions.
See ``AutoOpt-ed Library for AutoOpt-ed Program'' (@pxref{lib and program})
for more details.
@end enumerate

@c === SECTION MARKER

@node Licensing
@section AutoOpts Licensing
@cindex Licensing

When AutoGen is installed, the AutoOpts project is installed with it.
AutoOpts includes various AutoGen templates and a pair of shared
libraries.  These libraries may be used under the terms of version 3
of the GNU Lesser General Public License (LGPL).

One of these libraries (@code{libopts}) is needed by programs that are built
using AutoOpts generated code.  This library is available as a separate
``tear-off'' source tarball.  It is redistributable for use under either of
two licenses: The above mentioned GNU Lesser General Public License, and
the advertising-clause-free BSD license.  Both of these license terms are
incorporated into appropriate COPYING files included with the @code{libopts}
source tarball.  This source may be incorporated into your package with
the following simple commands:

@example
rm -rf libopts libopts-*
gunzip -c `autoopts-config libsrc` | \
   tar -xvf -
mv libopts-*.*.* libopts
@end example

View the @file{libopts/README} file for further integration information.

@c === SECTION MARKER

@page
@node Caveats
@section Developer and User Notes

AutoOpts has its conventional way of displaying option information
that includes somewhat more information that the standard GNU method.
AutoOpts will also print out a line of usage text for each option type
when options are misspecified.  GNU programs typically do not do this.
These defaults can be changed on a per-program basis by adding either
or both of the following in the option definition file:

@example
gnu-usage;
no-misuse-usage;
@end example

Users may also override these settings with the @code{AUTOOPTS_USAGE}
environment variable.  It may be set to a comma or white space separated
list of the following strings:

@table @samp
@item gnu
@cindex gnu
The format of the extended usage text will be displayed in GNU-normal form.
The default display for @code{--version} will be to include a note
on licensing terms.

@item autoopts
@cindex autoopts
The format of the extended usage will be in AutoOpts' native layout.

@item no-misuse-usage
@cindex no-misuse-usage
When an option error is made on the command line, the abbreviated
usage text will be suppressed.

@item misuse-usage
@cindex misuse-usage
When an option error is made on the command line, the abbreviated
usage text will be shown.
@end table

@noindent
The setting used is the last one seen.  The @code{autoopts} and
@code{misuse-usage} serve no purpose, unless the definition file
entries were specified as above.

@b{Note for developers}:

The templates used to implement AutoOpts depend heavily upon
token pasting.  That mens that if you name an option, ``debug'', for
example, the generated header will expect to be able to emit
@code{#define} macros such as this:
@example
#define DESC(n) (autogenOptions.pOptDesc[INDEX_OPT_## n])
@end example
and expect @code{DESC(DEBUG)} to expand correctly into
@code{(autogenOptions.pOptDesc[INDEX_OPT_DEBUG])}.
If @code{DEBUG} is @code{#defined} to something else, then
that something else will be in the above expansion.

If you discover you are having strange problems like this,
you may wish to use some variation of the @code{guard-option-names}
@xref{program attributes}.


@c === SECTION MARKER

@page
@node Quick Start
@section Quick Start
@cindex example, simple AutoOpts

Since it is generally easier to start with a simple example than it is
to look at the options that AutoGen uses itself, here is a very simple
AutoOpts example.  You can copy this example out of the Info file and
into a source file to try it.  You can then embellish it into what you
really need.  For more extensive examples, you can also examine the help
output and option definitions for the commands @code{columns},
@code{getdefs} and @code{autogen} itself.

For our simple example, assume you have a program named @code{check}
that takes two options:

@enumerate
@item
A list of directories to check over for whatever it is @code{check} does.
You want this option available as a POSIX-style flag option
and a GNU long option.  You want to allow as many of these
as the user wishes.
@item
An option to show or not show the definition tree being used.
Only one occurrence is to be allowed, specifying one or the other.
@end enumerate

@ignore
END   == AUTOOPTS == DO NOT CHANGE THIS COMMENT or the surrounding 'ignore's
Extraction from autogen.texi
@end ignore
@noindent
First, specify your program attributes and its options to AutoOpts,
as with the following example.

@example
AutoGen Definitions options;
prog-name     = check;
prog-title    = "Checkout Automated Options";
long-opts;
gnu-usage;    /* GNU style preferred to default */

main = @{ main-type = shell-process; @};

flag = @{
    name      = check-dirs;
    value     = L;        /* flag style option character */
    arg-type  = string;   /* option argument indication  */
    max       = NOLIMIT;  /* occurrence limit (none)     */
    stack-arg;            /* save opt args in a stack    */
    descrip   = "Checkout directory list";
    doc       = 'name of each directory that is to be "checked out".';
@};

flag = @{
    name      = show_defs;
    descrip   = "Show the definition tree";
    disable   = dont;     /* mark as enable/disable type */
                          /* option.  Disable as `dont-' */
    doc       = 'disable, if you do not want to see the tree.';
@};
@end example

@noindent
This program will produce a program that digests its options and
writes the values as shell script code to stdout.
Run the following short script to produce this program:

@example
base=check
BASE=`echo $base | tr a-z- A-Z_`
cflags="-DTEST_$@{BASE@} `autoopts-config cflags`"
ldflags="`autoopts-config ldflags`"
autogen $@{base@}.def
cc -o $@{base@} -g $@{cflags@} $@{base@}.c $@{ldflags@}
./$@{base@} --help
@end example

@noindent
Running those commands yields:

@example
check - Checkout Automated Options
USAGE:  check [ -<flag> [<val>] | --<name>[@{=| @}<val>] ]...

   -L, --check-dirs=str       Checkout directory list
                                - may appear multiple times
       --show-defs            Show the definition tree
                                - disabled as --dont-show-defs
   -?, --help                 Display extended usage information and exit
   -!, --more-help            Extended usage information passed thru pager

Options are specified by doubled hyphens and their name or by a single
hyphen and the flag character.
Packaged by Bruce (2012-02-26)
Report check bugs to bkorb@@gnu.org
@end example
@ignore
START == AUTOOPTS-MAIN == DO NOT CHANGE THIS COMMENT or the surrounding 'ignore's
Extraction from autogen.texi
@end ignore

@noindent
Normally, however, you would not use the ``main'' clause.  Instead,
the file would be named something like @file{checkopt.def}, you would
compile @file{checkopt.c} the usual way, and link the object with the rest
of your program.

The options are processed by calling @code{optionProcess}
(@pxref{libopts-optionProcess}):

@example
main( int argc, char** argv )
@{
  @{
    int optct = optionProcess( &checkOptions, argc, argv );
    argc -= optct;
    argv += optct;
  @}
@end example

The options are tested and used as in the following fragment.
``@code{ENABLED_OPT}'' is used instead of ``@code{HAVE_OPT}'' for the
@code{show-defs} option because it is an enabled/disabled option type:

@example
  if (  ENABLED_OPT( SHOW_DEFS )
     && HAVE_OPT( CHECK_DIRS )) @{
    int    dirct = STACKCT_OPT( CHECK_DIRS );
    char** dirs  = STACKLST_OPT( CHECK_DIRS );
    while (dirct-- > 0) @{
      char* dir = *dirs++;
      ...
@end example

The ``doc'' clauses are used in the flag stanzas for man pages and
texinfo invoking documentation.  With the above definition file, the
two following commands will produce the two documentation files
@file{check.1} and @file{invoke-check.texi}.  The latter file will
be generated as a chapter, rather than a section or subsection.

@example
autogen -Tagman-cmd check.def
autogen -DLEVEL=chapter -Tagtexi-cmd -binvoke-check.texi check.def
@end example

@noindent
The result of which is left as an exercise for the reader.

A lot of magic happens to make this happen.
The rest of this chapter will describe the myriad of option attributes
supported by AutoOpts.  However, keep in mind that, in general, you won't
need much more than what was described in this "quick start" section.

@node Option Definitions
@section Option Definitions
@cindex Option Definitions

AutoOpts uses an AutoGen definitions file for the definitions of the
program options and overall configuration attributes.
The complete list of program and option attributes is quite extensive,
so if you are reading to understand how to use AutoOpts, I recommend
reading the "Quick Start" section (@pxref{Quick Start}) and paying
attention to the following:

@enumerate
@item
@code{prog-name}, @code{prog-title}, and @code{argument}, program
attributes, @xref{program attributes}.
@item
@code{name} and @code{descrip} option attributes, @xref{Required Attributes}.
@item
@code{value} (flag character) and @code{min} (occurrence counts)
option attributes, @xref{Common Attributes}.
@item
@code{arg-type} from the option argument specification section,
@xref{Option Arguments}.
@item
Read the overall how to, @xref{Using AutoOpts}.
@item
Highly recommended, but not required, are the several "man" and
"info" documentation attributes, @xref{documentation attributes}.
@end enumerate

Keep in mind that the majority are rarely used and can be safely
ignored.  However, when you have special option processing requirements,
the flexibility is there.

@menu
* program attributes::          Program Description Attributes
* library attributes::          Options for Library Code
* information attributes::      Program Information Attributes
* Generated main::              Generating main procedures
* option attributes::           Option Attributes
* Option Arguments::            Option Argument Specification
* Option Argument Handling::    Option Argument Handling
* Internationalizing Options::  Internationalizing Options
* documentation attributes::    Man and Info doc Attributes
* automatic options::           Automatically Supported Options
* standard options::            Library of Standard Options
@end menu

@node program attributes
@subsection Program Description Attributes
@cindex program attributes

The following global definitions are used to define attributes of the entire
program.  These generally alter the configuration or global behavior of the
AutoOpts option parser.  The first two are required of every program.  The
third is required if there are to be any left over arguments (operands)
after option processing.  The rest have been grouped below.  Except as noted,
there may be only one copy of each of these definitions:

@table @samp

@item prog-name
@vindex prog-name
This attribute is required.  Variable names derived from this name
are derived using @code{string->c_name!} (@pxref{SCM string->c-name!}).

@item prog-title
@vindex prog-title
This attribute is required and may be any descriptive text.

@item argument
@vindex argument
This attribute is required if your program uses operand arguments.
It specifies the syntax of the arguments that @strong{follow} the options.
It may not be empty, but if it is not supplied, then option processing
must consume all the arguments.  If it is supplied and starts with an
open bracket (@code{[}), then there is no requirement on the presence or
absence of command line arguments following the options.  Lastly, if it
is supplied and does not start with an open bracket, then option
processing must @strong{not} consume all of the command line arguments.
@end table

@menu
* usage attributes::            Usage and Version Info Display
* config attributes::           Program Configuration
* programming attributes::      Programming Details
* presentation attributes::     User Presentation Attributes
@end menu

@c
@c = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = =
@c
@node usage attributes
@subsubsection Usage and Version Info Display

These will affect the way usage is seen and whether or not version
information gets displayed.

@table @samp
@item full-usage
@vindex full-usage
If this attribute is provided, it may specify the full length
usage text, or a variable name assignable to a ``char const *'' pointer,
or it may be empty.  The meanings are determined by  the length.
@itemize @bullet
@item
If not provided, the text will be computed as normal.
@item
If the length is zero, then the usage text will be derived from
the current settings and inserted as text into the generated .c file.
@item
If the length is 1 to 32 bytes, then it is presumed to be a variable
name that either points to or is an array of const chars.
@item
If it is longer than that, it is presumed to be the help text itself.
This text will be inserted into the generated .c file.
@end itemize

This string should be readily translatable and provision will be made
to translate it if this is provided and the source code is compiled with
``ENABLE_NLS'' defined.

@item short-usage
@vindex short-usage
If this attribute is provided, it is used to specify an abbreviated
version of the usage text.  This text is constructed in the same way
as the ``full-usage'', described above.

@item gnu-usage
@vindex gnu-usage
AutoOpts normaly displays usage text in a format that provides more
information than the standard GNU layout, but that also means it is
not the standard GNU layout.  This attribute changes the default to
GNU layout, with the @code{AUTOOPTS_USAGE} environment variable used
to request @code{autoopts} layout.
See @xref{Caveats, Developer and User Notes}.

@item no-misuse-usage
@vindex no-misuse-usage
When there is a command line syntax error, by default AutoOpts will
display the abbreviated usage text, rather than just a one line
``you goofed it, ask for usage'' message.  You can change the default
behavior for your program by supplying this attribute.  The user may
override this choice, again, with the @code{AUTOOPTS_USAGE} environment
variable.  See @xref{Caveats, Developer and User Notes}.

@item prog-group
@vindex prog-group
The version text in the @file{getopt.tpl} template will include this
text in parentheses after the program name, when this attribute is specified.
For example:
@example
mumble (stumble) 1.0
@end example
@noindent
says that the ``@code{mumble}'' program is version 1.0 and is part of the
``@code{stumble}'' group of programs.

@item version
@vindex version
Specifies the program version and activates the VERSION option,
@xref{automatic options}.
@end table

@c
@c = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = =
@c
@node config attributes
@subsubsection Program Configuration

Programs may be ``pre-configured'' before normal command line options
are processed (See @pxref{Immediate Action, Immediate Action Attributes}).
How configuration files and environment variables are handled get
specified with these attributes.

@table @samp
@item disable-load
@itemx disable-save
@vindex disable-load
@vindex disable-save
Indicates that the command line usage of @code{--load-opts} and/or
@code{--save-opts} are disallowed.

@item environrc
@vindex environrc
Indicates looking in the environment for values of variables named,
@code{PROGRAM_OPTNAME} or @code{PROGRAM}, where @code{PROGRAM} is the
upper cased @code{C-name} of the program and @code{OPTNAME} is the
upper cased @code{C-name} of a specific option.  The contents of
the @code{PROGRAM} variable, if found, are tokenized and processed.
The contents of @code{PROGRAM_OPTNAME} environment variables are taken
as the option argument to the option nameed @code{optname}.

@item homerc
@vindex homerc
Specifies that option settings may be loaded from and stored into
configuration files.  Each instance of this attribute is either a directory or
a file using a specific path, a path based on an environment variable or a
path relative to installation directories.  The method used depends on the name.
If the one entry is empty, it enables the loading and storing of settings,
but no specific files are searched for.  Otherwise, a series of configuration
files are hunted down and, if found, loaded.

If the first character of the @samp{homerc} value is not the dollar
character (@code{$}), then it is presumed to be a path name based on the
current directory.  Otherwise, the method depends on the second character:

@table @code
@item $
The path is relative to the directory where the executable was found.
@item @@
The path is relative to the package data directory, e.g.
@code{/usr/local/share/autogen}.
@item [a-zA-Z]
The path is derived from the named environment variable.
@end table

Use as many as you like.  The presence of this attribute
activates the @code{--save-opts} and @code{--load-opts} options.
However, saving into a file may be disabled with the @samp{disable-save}.
@xref{loading rcfile}.
See the @code{optionMakePath(3AGEN)} man page for excruciating details.

@item rcfile
@vindex rcfile
Specifies the configuration file name.  This is only useful if you
have provided at least one @code{homerc} attribute.
@example
default: .<prog-name>rc
@end example

@item vendor-opt
@vindex vendor-opt
This option implements the @code{-W} vendor option command line option.

For POSIX specified utilities, the options are constrained to the options
that are specified by POSIX.  Extensions should be handled with @code{-W}
command line options, the short flag form.  Long option name processing
must be disabled.  In fact, the @code{long-opts} attribute must not be
provided, and some options must be specified without flag values.

The @code{-W long-name} is processed by looking up the long option
name that follows it.  It cannot be a short flag because that would
conflict with the POSIX flag name space.  It will be processed as if
long options were accepted and @code{--long-name} were found on the
command line.
@end table

@c
@c = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = =
@c
@node programming attributes
@subsubsection Programming Details

These attributes affect some of the ways that the option data are
used and made available to the program.

@table @samp
@item config-header
@vindex config-header
The contents of this attribute should be just the name of the configuration
file.  A "#include" naming this file will be inserted at the top of the
generated header.

@item exit-name
@itemx exit-desc
@vindex exit-name
@vindex exit-desc
These values should be defined as indexed values, thus:
@example
exit-name[0] = success;
exit-desc[0] = 'Successful program execution.';
exit-name[1] = failure;
exit-desc[1] = 'The operation failed or command syntax was not valid.';
@end example
By default, all programs have these effectively defined for them.
They may be overridden by explicitly defining any or all of these values.
Additional names and descriptions may be defined.
They will cause an enumeration to be emitted, like this one
for @code{getdefs}:
@example
typedef enum @{
    GETDEFS_EXIT_SUCCESS = 0,
    GETDEFS_EXIT_FAILURE = 1
@} getdefs_exit_code_t;
@end example
@noindent
which will be augmented by any @code{exit-name} definitions beyond ``1''.

@item usage-message
@vindex usage-message
This attribute will cause two procedures to be added to the code file:
@code{usage_message} and @code{vusage_message}, with any applicable prefix
(see @code{prefix}, below).  They are declared in the
generated header, thus:
@example
extern void vusage_message(char const * fmt, va_list ap);
extern void usage_message(char const * fmt, ...);
@end example
@noindent
These functions print the message to @file{stderr} and invoke the usage
function with the exit code set to @code{1} (@code{EXIT_FAILURE}).

@item export
@vindex export
This string is inserted into the .h interface file.  Generally used for
global variables or @code{#include} directives required by
@code{flag-code} text and shared with other program text.
Do not specify your configuration header (@file{config.h}) in this
attribute or the @code{include} attribute, however.  Instead, use
@code{config-header}, above.

@item guard-option-names
@vindex guard-option-names
AutoOpts generates macros that presume that there are no @code{cpp} macros
with the same name as the option name.  For example, if you have an option
named, @code{debug}, then you must not use @code{#ifdef DEBUG} in your code.
If you specify this attribute, every option name will be guarded.  If the name
is @code{#define}-d, then a warning will be issued and the name undefined.
If you do not specify this and there is a conflict, you will get strange
error messages.

This attribute may be set to any of four recognized states:

@itemize @bullet
@item
Not defined.  AutoOpts will behave as described above.

@item
Defined, but set to the empty string.  Text will be emitted into the header
to undefine (@code{#undef}) any conflicting preprocessor macros.  The code
will include compiler warnings (via @code{#warning}).  Some compilers are
not ANSI-C-99 compliant yet and will error out on those warnings.  You may
compile with @code{-DNO_OPTION_NAME_WARNINGS} to silence or mostly silence
them.

@item
Defined and set to the string, ``@code{no-warning}''.  All of the needed
@code{#undef}s will be emitted, without any conflict checking @code{#warning}
directives emitted.

@item
Defined and set to the string, ``@code{full-enum}''.  The option manipulation
preprocessor macros will not token paste the option names to the index
enumeration prefix.  e.g. you will need to use @code{HAVE_OPT(INDEX_OPT_DEBUG)}
instead of @code{HAVE_OPT(DEBUG)}.
@end itemize

@item include
@vindex include
This string is inserted into the .c file.  Generally used for global
variables required only by @code{flag-code} program text.

@item no-libopts
@vindex no-libopts
If you are going to handle your option processing with the @code{getopt.tpl}
template instead of using libopts, then specify this attribute.  It will
suppress mention of @code{--more-help} in the generated documentation.
(@code{getopt_long} does not support @code{--more-help}.)

@item prefix
@vindex prefix
This value is inserted into @strong{all} global names.  This will
disambiguate them if more than one set of options are to be compiled
into a single program.
@end table

@c
@c = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = =
@c
@node presentation attributes
@subsubsection User Presentation Attributes

Attributes that affect the user's experience.

@table @samp
@item allow-errors
@vindex allow-errors
The presence of this attribute indicates ignoring any command line
option errors.  This may also be turned on and off by invoking the
macros @code{ERRSKIP_OPTERR} and @code{ERRSTOP_OPTERR} from the
generated interface file.

@item long-opts
@vindex long-opts
@cindex named option mode
Presence indicates GNU-standard long option processing.  Partial name
matches are accepted, if they are at least two characters long and the
partial match is unique.  The matching is not case sensitive, and the
underscore, hyphen and carat characters are all equivalent (they match).

If any options do not have an option value (flag character) specified,
and least one does specify such a value, then you must specify
@code{long-opts}.  If none of your options specify an option value
(flag character) and you do not specify @code{long-opts}, then command
line arguments are processed in "named option mode".  This means that:

@itemize @bullet
@item
Every command line argument must be a long option.
@item
The flag markers @code{-} and @code{--} are completely optional.
@item
The @code{argument} program attribute is disallowed.
@item
One of the options may be specified as the default
(as long as it has a required option argument).
@end itemize

@item no-xlate
@vindex no-xlate
Modifies when or whether option names get translated.  If provided,
it must be assigned one of two values:
@table @samp
@item opt-cfg
to suppress option name translation for configuration file and and environment
variable processing.
@item opt
to suppress option name translation completely.  The usage text will
always be translated if @code{ENABLE_NLS} is defined and you have
translations for that text.
@end table
See also the various ``@code{XLAT}'' interface entries in the
AutoOpts Programmatic Interface section (@pxref{AutoOpts API}).

@item reorder-args
@vindex reorder-args
Normally, POSIX compliant commands do not allow for options to be interleaved
with operands.  If this is necessary for historical reasons, there are two
approaches available:
@itemize @bullet
@item
Allow @code{optionProcess} to return the index of the operand like it normally
does and process the operand(s).  When an operand is encountered that starts
with a hyphen, then set the AutoOpts current index with the @code{RESTART_OPT}
macro (see @pxref{RESTART_OPT}), and re-invoke @code{optionProcess}.  This will
also allow you to process the operands in context.

@item
Specify this attribute.  AutoOpts will re-order the command arguments
so that the operands appear (in the original order) at the end of
the argument list.  Differing configuration state is not possible
to detect after all options have been processed.
@end itemize

@item resettable
@vindex resettable
Specifies that the @code{--reset-option} command line option is to be supported.
This makes it possible to suppress any setting that might be found in
a configuration file or environment variable.
@end table

@node library attributes
@subsection Options for Library Code
@cindex library attributes

Some libraries provide their own code for processing command line
options, and this may be used by programs that utilize AutoOpts.
You may also wish to write a library that gets configured with AutoOpts
options and config files.  Such a library may either supply its own
configury routine and process its own options, or it may export its
option descriptions to programs that also use AutoOpts.  This section
will describe how to do all of these different things.

@menu
* lib and program::         AutoOpt-ed Library for AutoOpt-ed Program
* lib called::              AutoOpt-ed Library for Regular Program
* prog calls lib::          AutoOpt-ed Program Calls Regular Library
@end menu

@node lib and program
@subsubsection AutoOpt-ed Library for AutoOpt-ed Program

The library source code must provide an option definition file that consists
of only the attribute @code{library}
@vindex library
and @code{flag} entries.  The ``library'' attribute does not need any
associated value, so it will generally appeary by itself on a line folowed
by a semi-colon.  The first @code{flag} entry must contain the following
attributes:

@table @samp
@item name
This name is used in the construction of a global pointer of type
@code{tOptDesc const*}.  It is always required.
@item documentation
@vindex documentation
It tells @code{AutoOpts} that this option serves no normal purpose.
It will be used to add usage clarity and to locate option descriptors
in the library code.
@item descrip
This is a string that is inserted in the extended usage display
before the options specific to the current library.  It is always required.
@item lib-name
@vindex lib-name
This should match the name of the library.  This string is also used in
the construction of the option descriptor pointer name.  In the end, it
looks like this:
@example
extern tOptDesc const* <<lib-name>>_<<name>>_optDesc_p;
@end example
@noindent
and is used in the macros generated for the library's @code{.h} file.
@end table

In order to compile this @code{AutoOpts} using library, you must create a
special header that is not used by the client program.  This is accomplished
by creating an option definition file that contains essentially exactly the
following:

@example
AutoGen definitions options;
prog-name  = does-not-matter;  // but is always required
prog-title = 'also does not matter';  // also required
config-header = 'config.h'; // optional, but common
library;
#include library-options-only.def
@end example

@noindent
and nothing else.  AutoGen will produce only the @code{.h} file.
You may now compile your library, referencing just this @code{.h} file.
The macros it creates will utilize a global variable that will be defined
by the @code{AutoOpts}-using client program.  That program will need to
have the following @code{#include} in @i{its} option definition file:

@example
#include library-options-only.def
@end example

@noindent
All the right things will magically happen so that the global variables
named @code{<<lib-name>>_<<name>>_optDesc_p} are initialized correctly.
For an example, please see the @code{AutoOpts} test script:
@file{autoopts/test/library.test}.

@node lib called
@subsubsection AutoOpt-ed Library for Regular Program

In this case, your library must provide an option processing function
to a calling program.  This is accomplished by setting the @code{allow-errors}
global option attribute.  Each time your option handling function is called,
you must determine where your scan is to resume and tell the AutoOpts library
by invoking:

@example
RESTART_OPT(next_arg_index);
@end example

@noindent
and then invoke @code{not_opt_index = optionProcess(...)}.
The @code{not_opt_index} value can be used to set @code{optind},
if that is the global being used to scan the program argument array.

In this method, do @strong{NOT} utilize the global @code{library} attribute.
Your library must specify its options as if it were a complete program.
You may choose to specify an alternate @code{usage()} function so that
usage for other parts of the option interface may be displayed as well.
See ``Program Information Attributes'' (@pxref{information attributes}).

At the moment, there is no method for calling @code{optionUsage()} telling
it to produce just the information about the options and not the program
as a whole.  Some later revision after somebody asks.

@node prog calls lib
@subsubsection AutoOpt-ed Program Calls Regular Library

As with providing an @code{AutoOpt}-ed library to a non-@code{AutoOpt}-ed
program, you must write the option description file as if you were writing
all the options for the program, but you should specify the
@code{allow-errors} global option attribute and you will likely want an
alternate @code{usage()} function (see ``Program Information Attributes''
@pxref{information attributes}).  In this case, though, when
@code{optionProcess()} returns, you need to test to see if there might be
library options.  If there might be, then call the library's exported
routine for handling command line options, set the next-option-to-process
with the @code{RESTART_OPT()} macro, and recall @code{optionProcess()}.
Repeat until done.

@node information attributes
@subsection Program Information Attributes
@cindex information attributes

These attributes are used to define how and what information is displayed
to the user of the program.

@table @samp
@item copyright
@vindex copyright
The @code{copyright} is a structured value containing three to five
values.  If @code{copyright} is used, then the first three are required.

@enumerate
@item
@vindex date
@file{date} - the list of applicable dates for the copyright.
@item
@vindex owner
@file{owner} - the name of the copyright holder.
@item
@vindex type
@file{type} - specifies the type of distribution license.
AutoOpts/AutoGen supports the text of the GNU Public License (@file{gpl}),
the GNU ``Lesser'' General Public License with Library extensions
(@file{lgpl}), the Modified Free BSD license (@file{mbsd}) and a few others.
Other licenses may be specified, but you must provide your own license file.
The list of license files provided by AutoOpts may be seen by typing:
@example
ls $(autoopts-config pkgdatadir)/*.lic
@end example
@item
@vindex text
@file{text} - the text of the copyright notice.  This must be provided
if @file{type} is set to @file{NOTE}.
@item
@vindex author
@file{author} - in case the author name is to appear in the documentation
and is different from the copyright owner.
@item
@vindex eaddr
@file{eaddr} - email address for receiving praises and complaints.
Typically that of the author or copyright holder.
@end enumerate
@*
An example of this might be:
@example
copyright = @{
    date  = "1992-2012";
    owner = "Bruce Korb";
    eaddr = 'bkorb@@gnu.org';
    type  = GPL;
@};
@end example

@item detail
@vindex detail
This string is added to the usage output when the HELP option is
selected.

@item explain
@vindex explain
Gives additional information whenever the usage routine is invoked.

@item package
@vindex package
The name of the package the program belongs to.  This will appear
parenthetically after the program name in the version and usage output,
e.g.:  @code{autogen @i{(GNU autogen)} - The Automated Program Generator}.

@item preserve-case
@vindex preserve-case
This attribute will not change anything except appearance.  Normally, the
option names are all documented in lower case.  However, if you specify this
attribute, then they will display in the case used in their specification.
Command line options will still be matched without case sensitivity.
This is useful for specifying option names in camel-case.

@item prog-desc @strong{and}
@itemx opts-ptr
@vindex prog-desc
@vindex opts-ptr
These define global pointer variables that point to the program
descriptor and the first option descriptor for a library option.  This
is intended for use by certain libraries that need command line and/or
initialization file option processing.  These definitions have no effect
on the option template output, but are used for creating a library
interface file.  Normally, the first "option" for a library will be a
documentation option that cannot be specified on the command line, but
is marked as @code{settable}.  The library client program will invoke the
@code{SET_OPTION} macro which will invoke a handler function that will
finally set these global variables.

@item usage
@vindex usage
Optionally names the usage procedure, if the library routine
@code{optionUsage()} does not work for you.  If you specify
@code{my_usage} as the value of this attribute, for example, you will
use a procedure by that name for displaying usage.  Of course, you will
need to provide that procedure and it must conform to this profile:
@example
void @i{my_usage}( tOptions* pOptions, int exitCode )
@end example

@item gnu-usage
@vindex gnu-usage
Normally, the default format produced by the @code{optionUsage} procedure
is @i{AutoOpts Standard}.  By specifying this attribute, the default format
will be @i{GNU-ish style}.  Either default may be overridden by the user with
the @code{AUTOOPTS_USAGE} environment variable.  If it is set to @code{gnu}
or @code{autoopts}, it will alter the style appropriately.  This attribute
will conflict with the @code{usage} attribute.

@item reorder-args
@vindex reorder-args
Some applications traditionally require that the command operands be
intermixed with the command options.  In order to handle that, the arguments
must be reordered.  If you are writing such an application, specify this
global option.  All of the options (and any associated option arguments)
will be brought to the beginning of the argument list.  New applications
should not use this feature, if at all possible.  This feature is
@i{disabled} if @code{POSIXLY_CORRECT} is defined in the environment.
@end table

@node Generated main
@subsection Generating main procedures
@cindex main procedure

When AutoOpts generates the code to parse the command line options, it has
the ability to produce any of several types of @code{main()} procedures.
This is done by specifying a global structured value for
@vindex main
@code{main}.  The values that it contains are dependent on the value set for
the one value it must have: @code{main-type}.

@vindex main-type
The recognized values for @code{main-type} are:
@menu
* main guile::              guile: main and inner_main procedures
* main shell-process::      shell-process: emit Bourne shell results
* main shell-parser::       shell-parser: emit Bourne shell script
* main main::               main: user supplied main procedure
* main include::            include: code emitted from included template
* main invoke::             invoke: code emitted from AutoGen macro
* main for-each::           for-each: perform function on each argument
@end menu

Here is an example of an @code{include} variation:

@example
main = @{
  main-type = include;
  tpl       = "main-template.tpl";
@};
@end example

@node main guile
@subsubsection guile: main and inner_main procedures

When the @code{main-type} is specified to be @code{guile},
a @code{main()} procedure is generated that calls @code{gh_enter()}, providing
it with a generated @code{inner_main()} to invoke.  If you must perform
certain tasks before calling @code{gh_enter()}, you may specify such code
in the value for the
@vindex before-guile-boot
@code{before-guile-boot} attribute.

The @code{inner_main()} procedure itself will process the command line
arguments (by calling @code{optionProcess()},
@pxref{libopts-optionProcess}), and then either invoke the code
specified with the
@vindex guile-main
@code{guile-main} attribute, or else export the parsed options to Guile
symbols and invoke the @code{scm_shell()} function from the Guile library.
This latter will render the program nearly identical to the stock
@code{guile(1)} program.

@node main shell-process
@subsubsection shell-process: emit Bourne shell results

This will produce a @code{main()} procedure that parses the command line
options and emits to @file{stdout} Bourne shell commands that puts the
option state into environment variables.  This can be used within a
shell script as follows:

@example
unset OPTION_CT
eval "`opt_parser \"$@@\"`"
test -z "$@{OPTION_CT@}" && exit 1
test $@{OPTION_CT@} -gt 0 && shift $@{OPTION_CT@}
@end example

If the option parsing code detects an error or a request for usage,
it will not emit an assignment to OPTION_CT and the script should just
exit.  If the options are set consistently, then something along the
lines of the following will be written to @file{stdout} and evaled:

@example
    OPTION_CT=4
    export OPTION_CT
    MYPROG_SECOND='first'
    export MYPROG_SECOND
    MYPROG_ANOTHER=1 # 0x1
    export MYPROG_ANOTHER
@end example

@noindent
If the arguments are to be reordered, however, then the resulting set
of operands will be emitted and @code{OPTION_CT} gets set to zero.
For example, the following would be appended to the above:

@example
    set -- 'operand1' 'operand2' 'operand3'
    OPTION_CT=0
@end example

@noindent
@code{OPTION_CT} is set to zero since it is not necessary to shift
off any options.

@node main shell-parser
@subsubsection shell-parser: emit Bourne shell script

This will produce a @code{main()} procedure that emits a shell script
that will parse the command line options.  That script can be emitted
to @file{stdout} or inserted or substituted into a pre-existing shell
script file.  Improbable markers are used to identify previously inserted
parsing text:

@example
# # # # # # # # # # -- do not modify this marker --
@end example

@noindent
The program is also pretty insistent upon starting its parsing script
on the second line.

@node main main
@subsubsection main: user supplied main procedure

You must supply a value for the @code{main-text} attribute.
You may also supply a value for
@vindex option-code
@code{option-code}.  If you do, then the @code{optionProcess} invocation
will not be emitted into the code.  AutoOpts will wrap the @code{main-text}
inside of:

@example
int
main( int argc, char** argv )
@{
    @{ // replaced by option-code, if that exists
        int ct = optionProcess( &<<prog-name>>Options, argc, argv );
        argc -= ct;
        argv += ct;
    @}
<<your main-text goes here>>
@}
@end example

@noindent
so you can most conveniently set the value with a ``@code{here string}''
(@pxref{here-string}):

@example
code = <<- _EndOfMainProc_
	<<your text goes here>>
	_EndOfMainProc_;
@end example

@node main include
@subsubsection include: code emitted from included template

You must write a template to produce your main procedure.
You specify the name of the template with the @code{tpl} attribute
and it will be incorporated at the point where AutoOpts is ready
to emit the @code{main()} procedure.

This can be very useful if, in your working environment, you have
many programs with highly similar @code{main()} procedures.  All you need
to do is parameterize the variations and specify which variant is needed
within the @code{main} AutoOpts specification.  Since you are coding
the template for this, the attributes needed for this variation would
be dictated by your template.

@node main invoke
@subsubsection invoke: code emitted from AutoGen macro

You must write a template to produce your main procedure.  That template
must contain a definition for the function specified with the @code{func}
attribute to this @code{main()} procedure specification.  Typically, this
template will be incorporated by using the @code{--lib-template} option
(@pxref{autogen lib-template}) in the AutoGen invocation.  Otherwise, this
variation operates in much the same way as ``@code{include}''
(@pxref{main include}) method.

@node main for-each
@subsubsection for-each: perform function on each argument

This produces a main procedure that invokes a procedure once for each operand
on the command line (non-option arguments), @strong{OR} once for each
non-blank, non-comment @code{stdin} input line.  Leading and trailing white
space is trimmed from the input line and comment lines are lines that are
empty or begin with a comment character, defaulting to a hash ('#') character.

@strong{NB}:
The @code{argument} program attribute (@pxref{program attributes})
must begin with the @code{[} character, to indicate that there are
command operands, but that they are optional.

There are a number of attributes to @code{main} that may be used:

@table @code
@item  handler-proc
@vindex handler-proc
This attribute is required.  It is used to name the procedure to call.
That procedure is presumed to be external, but if you provide the code
for it, then the procedure is emitted as a static procedure in the
generated code.

This procedure should return 0 on success, a cumulative error code on warning
and exit without returning on an unrecoverable error.  As the cumulative
warning codes are @i{or}-ed together, the codes should be some sort of bit
mask in order to be ultimately decipherable (if you need to do that).

If the called procedure needs to cause a fail-exit, it is expected to call
@code{exit(3)} directly.  If you want to cause a warning exit code, then this
handler function should return a non-zero status.  That value will be
@strong{OR}-ed into a result integer for computing the final exit code.  E.g.,
here is part of the emitted code:

@example
  int res = 0;
  if (argc > 0) @{
     do  @{
         res |= @i{my_handler}( *(argv++) );
     @} while (--argc > 0);
  @} else @{ ...
@end example

@item handler-type
@vindex handler-type
If you do not supply this attribute, your handler procedure must be
the default type.  The profile of the procedure must be:

@example
int @i{my_handler}( char const *pz_entry );
@end example

@noindent
However, if you do supply this attribute, you may set the value to any of
four alternate flavors:

@table @samp
@item name-of-file
This is essentially the same as the default handler type, except that before
your procedure is invoked, the generated code has verified that the string
names an existing file.  The profile is unchanged.

@item file-X
Before calling your procedure, the file is f-opened according to the ``X'',
where ``X'' may be any of the legal modes for @code{fopen(3C)}.  In this case,
the profile for your procedure must be:

@example
int @i{my_handler}( char const* pz_fname, FILE* entry_fp );
@end example

@item  text-of-file
@itemx some-text-of-file
Before calling your procedure, the contents of the file are read or mapped into memory.
(Excessively large files may cause problems.)  The @samp{some-text-of-file}
disallows empty files.  Both require regular files.  In this case, the profile
for your procedure must be:

@example
program_exit_code_t
@i{my_handler}(char const* pz_fname, char* file_text,
           size_t text_size);
@end example

@noindent
Note that though the @code{file_text} is not @code{const}, any changes made to
it are not written back to the original file.  It is merely a memory image of
the file contents.  Also, the memory allocated to hold the text is
@code{text_size + 1} bytes long and the final byte is always @code{NUL}.
The file contents need not be text, as the data are read with the @code{read(2)}
system call.
@end table

If you select one of these file type handlers, then on access or usage errors
the @code{PROGRAM_EXIT_FAILURE} exit code will, by default, be or-ed
into the final exit code.  This can be changed by specifying the
global @code{file-fail-code} attribute and naming a different value.
That is, something other than @code{failure}.  You may choose @code{success},
in which case file access issues will not affect the exit code and the error
message will not be printed.

@item @i{my_handler}-code
@vindex MYHANDLER-code
With this attribute, you provide the code for your handler procedure
in the option definition file.  In this case, your @code{main()}
procedure specification might look something like this:

@example
main = @{
  main-type    = for-each;
  handler-proc = @i{my_handler};
  @i{my_handler}-code = <<- EndOfMyCode
	/* whatever you want to do */
	EndOfMyCode;
@};
@end example

@noindent
and instead of an emitted external reference, a procedure will be emitted
that looks like this:

@example
static int
@i{my_handler}( char const* pz_entry )
@{
    int res = 0;
    <<@i{my_handler}-code goes here>>
    return res;
@}
@end example

@item main-init
@vindex main-init
This is code that gets inserted after the options have been processed, but
before the handler procs get invoked.

@item main-fini
@vindex main-fini
This is code that gets inserted after all the entries have been processed,
just before returning from @code{main()}.

@item comment-char
@vindex comment-char
If you wish comment lines to start with a character other than a hash
(@code{#}) character, then specify one character with this attribute.
If that character is the @code{NUL} byte, then only blank lines will be
considered comments.
@end table

@node option attributes
@subsection Option Attributes
@cindex option attributes

For each option you wish to specify, you must have a block macro named
@code{flag} defined.  There are two required attributes: @code{name} and
@code{descrip}.  If any options do not have a @code{value} (traditional flag
character) attribute, then the @code{long-opts} program attribute must also
be defined.  As a special exception, if no options have a @code{value}
@strong{and} @code{long-opts} is not defined @strong{and} @code{argument} is
not defined, then all arguments to the program are named options.  In this
case, the @code{-} and @code{--} command line option markers are optional.

@menu
* Required Attributes::         Required Attributes
* Common Attributes::           Common Option Attributes
* Immediate Action::            Immediate Action Attributes
* Option Conflict Attributes::  Option Conflict Attributes

These option attributes do not fit well with the above categories.

* opt-attr settable::           Program may set option
* opt-attr no-preset::          Option cannot be pre-configured
* opt-attr equivalence::        Option Equivalence Class
* opt-attr aliases::            Option Aliasing
* opt-attr default option::     Default Option
* opt-attr documentation::      Option Sectioning Comment
* opt-attr translators::        Translator Notes
@end menu

@node Required Attributes
@subsubsection Required Attributes
@cindex Required Attributes

Every option must have exactly one copy of both of these attributes.

@table @samp
@item name
@vindex name
Long name for the option.  Even if you are not accepting long options
and are only accepting flags, it must be provided.  AutoOpts generates
private, named storage that requires this name.  This name also causes
a @code{#define}-d name to be emitted.  It must not conflict with any
other names you may be using in your program.

For example, if your option name is, @code{debug} or @code{munged-up},
you must not use the @code{#define} names @code{DEBUG} (or
@code{MUNGED_UP}) in your program for non-AutoOpts related purposes.
They are now used by AutoOpts.

Sometimes (most especially under Windows), you may get a surprise.
For example, @code{INTERFACE} is apparently a user space name that
one should be free to use.  Windows usurps this name.  To solve this,
you must do one of the following:

@enumerate
@item
Change the name of your option
@item
add the program attribute (@pxref{program attributes}):

@example
export = '#undef INTERFACE';
@end example
@item
add the program attribute:

@example
guard-option-names;
@end example
@end enumerate

@item descrip
@vindex descrip
Except for documentation options, a @strong{very} brief description of the
option.  About 40 characters on one line, maximum, not counting any texinfo
markups.  Texinfo markups are stripped before printing in the usage text.  It
appears on the @code{usage()} output next to the option name.

If, however, the option is a documentation option, it will appear on one or
more lines by itself.  It is thus used to visually separate and comment upon
groups of options in the usage text.
@end table

@node Common Attributes
@subsubsection Common Option Attributes
@cindex Common Option Attributes

These option attributes are optional.  Any that do appear in the
definition of a flag, may appear only once.

@table @samp
@item value
@vindex value
The flag character to specify for traditional option flags, e.g., @code{-L}.

@item max
@vindex max
Maximum occurrence count (invalid if @var{disable} present).
The default maximum is 1.  @code{NOLIMIT} can be used for the value,
otherwise it must be a number or a @code{#define} that evaluates to a number.

@item min
@vindex min
Minimum occurrence count.  If present, then the option @strong{must}
appear on the command line.  Do not define it with the value zero (0).

@item must-set
@vindex must-set
If an option must be specified, but it need not be specified on
the command line, then specify this attribute for the option.

@item deprecated
@vindex deprecated
There are two effects to this attribute:  the usage text will not
show the option, and the generated documentation will mark it with:
``@emph{NOTE: THIS OPTION IS DEPRECATED}''.

@item disable
@vindex disable
Prefix for disabling (inverting sense of) the option.  Only useful
if long option names are being processed.  When an option has this
attribute, the test @code{ENABLED_OPT(OPTNAME)} is false when either
of the following is true:
@itemize @bullet
@item
The option has not been specified and the @code{enable} attribute has
not been specified.
@item
The option has been specified with this disabling prefix.
@end itemize
To detect that the option has been specified with the disabling
prefix, you must use:
@example
HAVE_OPT(OPTNAME) && ! ENABLED_OPT(OPTNAME)
@end example

@item enable
@vindex enable
Long-name prefix for enabling the option (invalid if @var{disable}
@strong{not} present).  Only useful if long option names are being
processed.

@item enabled
@vindex enabled
If default is for option being enabled.  (Otherwise, the OPTST_DISABLED
bit is set at compile time.)  Only useful if the option can be disabled.

@item ifdef
@itemx ifndef
@itemx omitted-usage
@vindex ifdef
@vindex ifndef
@vindex omitted-usage
If an option is relevant on certain platforms or when certain features
are enabled or disabled, you can specify the compile time flag used
to indicate when the option should be compiled in or out.  For example,
if you have a configurable feature, @code{mumble} that is indicated
with the compile time define, @code{WITH_MUMBLING}, then add:

@example
ifdef = WITH_MUMBLING;
@end example

@noindent
Take care when using these.  There are several caveats:

@itemize @bullet
@item
The case and spelling must match whatever is specified.
@item
Do not confuse these attributes with the AutoGen directives of the
same names, @xref{Directives}.  These cause C preprocessing directives
to be inserted into the generated C text.
@item
Only one of @code{ifdef} and @code{ifndef} may apply to any one option.
@item
The @code{VALUE_OPT_} values are @code{#define}-d.  If @code{WITH_MUMBLING}
is not defined, then the associated @code{VALUE_OPT_} value will not be
@code{#define}-d either.  So, if you have an option named, @code{MUMBLING}
that is active only if @code{WITH_MUMBLING} is @code{#define}-d, then
@code{VALUE_OPT_MUMBLING} will be @code{#define}-d iff @code{WITH_MUMBLING}
is @code{#define}-d.  Watch those switch statements.
@item
If you specify @code{omitted-usage}, then the option will be recognized
as disabled when it is configured out of the build, but will yield the
message, ``This option has been disabled.''  You may specify an alternate
message by giving @code{omitted-usage} a string value. e.g.:
@example
omitted-usage = 'you cannot do this';
@end example
@end itemize

@item no-command
@vindex no-command
This option specifies that the option is not allowed on the command line.
Such an option may not take a @code{value} (flag character) attribute.
The program must have the @code{homerc} (@pxref{program attributes}) option set.
@end table

@node Immediate Action
@subsubsection Immediate Action Attributes
@cindex immediate action

Certain options may need to be processed early.  For example, in order to
suppress the processing of configuration files, it is necessary to process the
command line option @code{--no-load-opts} @strong{before} the config files are
processed.  To accommodate this, certain options may have their enabled or
disabled forms marked for immediate processing.  The consequence of this is
that they are processed ahead of all other options in the reverse of normal
order.

Normally, the first options processed are the options specified in the first
@code{homerc} file, followed by then next @code{homerc} file through to the
end of config file processing.  Next, environment variables are processed and
finally, the command line options.  The later options override settings
processed earlier.  That actually gives them higher priority.  Command line
immediate action options actually have the lowest priority of all.  They would
be used only if they are to have an effect on the processing of subsequent
options.

@table @samp
@item immediate
@vindex immediate
Use this option attribute to specify that the enabled form of the option
is to be processed immediately.  The @code{help} and @code{more-help}
options are so specified.  They will also call @code{exit()} upon
completion, so they @strong{do} have an effect on the processing
of the remaining options :-).

@item immed-disable
@vindex immed-disable
Use this option attribute to specify that the disabled form of the
option is to be processed immediately.  The @code{load-opts} option is
so specified.  The @code{--no-load-opts} command line option will
suppress the processing of config files and environment variables.
Contrariwise, the @code{--load-opts} command line option is
processed normally.  That means that the options specified in that file
will be processed after all the @code{homerc} files and, in fact, after
options that precede it on the command line.

@item also
If either the @code{immediate} or the @code{immed-disable} attributes
are set to the string, ``@code{also}'', then the option will actually be
processed twice:  first at the immediate processing phase and again
at the ``normal'' time.
@end table

@node Option Conflict Attributes
@subsubsection Option Conflict Attributes
@cindex Option Conflict Attributes

These attributes may be used as many times as you need.
They are used at the end of the option processing to verify
that the context within which each option is found does not
conflict with the presence or absence of other options.

This is not a complete cover of all possible conflicts and
requirements, but it simple to implement and covers the
more common situations.

@table @samp
@cindex flags-must
@item flags-must
one entry for every option that @strong{must} be present
when this option is present

@cindex flags-cant
@item flags-cant
one entry for every option that @strong{cannot} be present
when this option is present
@end table

@node opt-attr settable
@subsubsection Program may set option
@vindex settable
If the option can be set outside of option processing, specify
``@code{settable}''.  If this attribute is defined, special macros for setting
this particular option will be inserted into the interface file.  For example,
@code{TEMPL_DIRS} is a settable option for AutoGen, so a macro named
@code{SET_OPT_TEMPL_DIRS(a)} appears in the interface file.  This attribute
interacts with the @var{documentation} attribute.

@node opt-attr no-preset
@subsubsection Option cannot be pre-configured
@vindex no-preset
@cindex configuration file
If presetting this option is not allowed, specify ``@code{no-preset}''.
(Thus, environment variables and values set in configuration files will be
ignored.)

@node opt-attr equivalence
@subsubsection Option Equivalence Class
@vindex equivalence
Generally, when several options are mutually exclusive and basically serve the
purpose of selecting one of several processing modes, specify the
``@code{equivalence}'' attribute.  These options will be considered an
equivalence class.  Sometimes, it is just easier to deal with them as such.
All members of the equivalence class must contain the same equivalenced-to
option, including the equivalenced-to option itself.  Thus, it must be a class
member.

For an option equivalence class, there is a single occurrence counter for
the class.  It can be referenced with the interface macro,
@code{COUNT_OPT(BASE_OPTION)}, where ``BASE_OPTION'' is the equivalenced-to
option name.

Also, please take careful note: since the options are mapped to the
equivalenced-to option descriptor, any option argument values are mapped to
that descriptor also.  Be sure you know which ``equivalent option'' was
selected before getting an option argument value!

During the presetting phase of option processing (@pxref{Presetting
Options}), equivalenced options may be specified.  However, if different
equivalenced members are specified, only the last instance will be
recognized and the others will be discarded.  A conflict error is indicated
only when multiple different members appear on the command line itself.

As an example of where equivalenced options might be useful, @code{cpio(1)}
has three options @code{-o}, @code{-i}, and @code{-p} that define the
operational mode of the program (@code{create}, @code{extract} and
@code{pass-through}, respectively).  They form an equivalence class from
which one and only one member must appear on the command line.  If
@code{cpio} were an AutoOpt-ed program, then each of these option
definitions would contain:

@example
equivalence = create;
@end example

and the program would be able to determine the operating mode
with code that worked something like this:

@example
switch (WHICH_IDX_CREATE) @{
case INDEX_OPT_CREATE:       ...
case INDEX_OPT_EXTRACT:      ...
case INDEX_OPT_PASS_THROUGH: ...
default:    /* cannot happen */
@}
@end example

@node opt-attr aliases
@subsubsection Option Aliasing

Sometimes, for backwards compatibility or tradition or just plain convenience,
it works better to define one option as a pure alias for another option.
For such situations, provide the following pieces of information:
@example
flag = @{
   name  = @i{aliasing-option-name};
   value = @i{aliasing-flag-char}; // optional !
   aliases = @i{aliased-to-option};
@};
@end example
Do not provide anything else.  The usage text for such an option will be:
@example
   This is an alias for @i{aliased-to-option}
@end example

@node opt-attr default option
@subsubsection Default Option
@vindex default
If your program processes its arguments in named option mode (See
@code{long-opts} in @ref{program attributes}), then you may select
@strong{one} of your options to be the default option.  Do so by using
attribute @code{default} with one of the options.  The option so specified
must have an @code{arg-type} (@pxref{Option Arguments}) specified, but not the
@code{arg-optional} (@pxref{arg-optional}) attribute.  That is to say, the
option argument must be required.

If you have done this, then any arguments that do not match an option name and
do not contain an equal sign (@code{=}) will be interpreted as an option
argument to the default option.

@node opt-attr documentation
@subsubsection Option Sectioning Comment
This attribute means the option exists for the purpose of separating option
description text in the usage output.  Libraries may choose to make it
settable so that the library can determine which command line option is the
first one that pertains to the library.

@vindex documentation
If the ``@code{documentation}'' attribute is present, then all other
attributes are disabled except @code{settable}, @code{call-proc} and
@code{flag-code}.  @code{settable} must be and is only specified if
@code{call-proc}, @code{extract-code} or @code{flag-code} has been specified.
When present, the @code{descrip} attribute will be displayed only when the
@code{--help} option has been specified.  It will be displayed flush to the
left hand margin and may consist of one or more lines of text.  The name of
the option will not be printed.

Documentation options are for clarifying the usage text and will not usually
appear in generated man pages or in the generated invoking texinfo doc.  They
may be gotten to appear in texinfo documents if the @code{USAGE_NODES}
environment variable is set to ``doc''.  In that case, the invoking menu will
have entries for these documentation flags, but not the individual options.

@node opt-attr translators
@subsubsection Translator Notes
@vindex translators
If you need to give the translators a special note about a particular option,
please use the ``@code{translators}'' attribute.  The attribute text will be
emitted into the generated @code{.c} text where the option related strings get
defined.  To make a general comment about all of the option code, add comments
to an @code{include} attribute (@pxref{program attributes}).  Do @strong{not}
use this attribute globally, or it will get emitted into every option
definition block.

@node Option Arguments
@subsection Option Argument Specification
@cindex Option Arguments

Command line options come in three flavors:  options that do not
take arguments, those that do and those that may.  Without an
"arg-type" attribute, AutoOpts will not process an argument to an
option.  If "arg-type" is specified and "arg-optional" is also
specified, then the next command line token will be taken to
be an argument, unless it looks like the name of another option.

If the argument type is specified to be anything other than "str[ing]", then
AutoOpts will specify a callback procedure to handle the argument.  Some of
these procedures will be created and inserted into the generated @code{.c}
file, and others are already built into the @file{libopts} library.
Therefore, if you write your own callback procedure
(@pxref{Option Argument Handling}), then you must either not specify an
"arg-type" attribute, or else specify it to be of type "str[ing]".  Your
callback function will be able to place its own restrictions on what that
string may contain or represent.

Option argument handling attributes depend upon the value set for the
@vindex arg-type
@code{arg-type} attribute.  It specifies the type of argument the option
will take.  If not present, the option cannot take an argument.  If present,
it must be an entry in the following table.  The first three letters is
sufficient.

@menu
* arg-type string::         Arg Type String
* arg-type number::         Arg Type Number
* arg-type boolean::        Arg Type Boolean
* arg-type keyword::        Arg Type Keyword
* arg-type set membership:: Arg Type Set Membership
* arg-type hierarchy::      Arg Type Hierarchical
* arg-type file name::      Arg Type File Name
* arg-type time-duration::  Arg Type Time Duration
* arg-type time-date::      Arg Type Time and Date

Supporting attributes for particular argument types:

* arg-keyword::             Keyword list
* arg-optional::            Option Argument Optional
* arg-default::             Default Option Argument Value
@end menu

@node arg-type string
@subsubsection Arg Type String
@code{arg-type = string;}

The argument may be any arbitrary string, though your program or option
callback procedure may place additional constraints upon it.


@node arg-type number
@subsubsection Arg Type Number
@code{arg-type = number;}

The argument must be a correctly formed integer, without any trailing U's or
L's.  AutoOpts contains a library procedure to convert the string to a number.
If you specify range checking with @code{arg-range} (see below), then AutoOpts
produces a special purpose procedure for this option.

@table @samp
@item scaled
@vindex scaled
@code{scaled} marks the option so that suffixes of @samp{k}, @samp{K},
@samp{m}, @samp{M}, @samp{g}, @samp{G}, @samp{t}, and @samp{T} will multiply
the given number by a power of 1000 or 1024.  Lower case letters scale by a
power of 1000 and upper case scale by a power of 1024.

@item arg-range
@vindex arg-range
@code{arg-range} is used to create a callback procedure for validating the
range of the option argument.  It must match one of the range entries.  Each
@code{arg-range} should consist of either an integer by itself or an integer
range.  The integer range is specified by one or two integers separated by the
two character sequence, @code{->}.  Be sure to quote the entire range string.
The definitions parser will not accept the range syntax as a single string
token.

The generated procedure imposes the range constraints as follows:
@itemize @bullet
@item
A number by itself will match that one value.
@item
The high end of the range may not be @code{INT_MIN}, both for obvious
reasons and because that value is used to indicate a single-valued match.
@item
An omitted lower value implies a lower bound of INT_MIN.
@item
An omitted upper value implies a upper bound of INT_MAX.
@item
The argument value is required.  It may not be optional.
@item
The value must match one of the entries.  If it can match more than one,
then you have redundancies, but no harm will come of it.
@end itemize
@end table


@node arg-type boolean
@subsubsection Arg Type Boolean
@code{arg-type = boolean;}

The argument will be interpreted and always yield either AG_TRUE or
AG_FALSE.  False values are@:  the empty string, the number zero, or a
string that starts with @code{f}, @code{F}, @code{n} or @code{N}
(representing False or No).  Anything else will be interpreted as True.


@node arg-type keyword
@subsubsection Arg Type Keyword
@code{arg-type = keyword;}

The argument must match a specified list of strings (@pxref{arg-keyword}).
Assuming you have named the option, @code{optn-name}, the strings will be
converted into an enumeration of type @code{te_Optn_Name} with the values
@code{OPTN_NAME_KEYWORD}.*  If you have @strong{not} specified a default value,
the value @code{OPTN_NAME_UNDEFINED} will be inserted with the value zero.
The option will be initialized to that value.  You may now use this in your
code as follows:

@example
te_Optn_Name opt = OPT_VALUE_OPTN_NAME;
switch (opt) @{
case OPTN_NAME_UNDEFINED:  /* undefined things */ break;
case OPTN_NAME_KEYWORD:    /* `keyword' things */ break;
default: /* utterly impossible */ ;
@}
@end example

AutoOpts produces a special purpose procedure for this option.

If you have need for the string name of the selected keyword, you
may obtain this with the macro, @code{OPT_OPTN_NAME_VAL2STR(val)}.
The value you pass would normally be @code{OPT_VALUE_OPTN_NAME},
but anything with numeric value that is legal for @code{te_Optn_Name}
may be passed.  Anything out of range will result in the string,
@code{"*INVALID*"} being returned.  The strings are read only.
It may be used as in:

@example
te_Optn_Name opt = OPT_VALUE_OPTN_NAME;
printf( "you selected the %s keyword\n",
        OPT_OPTN_NAME_VAL2STR(opt) );
@end example

* Note: you may replace the @code{OPTN_NAME} enumeration prefix with
another prefix by specifying a
@vindex prefix-enum
@code{prefix-enum} attribute.

@node arg-type set membership
@subsubsection Arg Type Set Membership
@code{arg-type = set;}

The argument must be a list of names each of which must match the strings
"@code{all}", "@code{none}" or one of the keywords (@pxref{arg-keyword})
specified for this option.  @code{all} will turn on all membership bits and
@code{none} will turn them all off.  Specifying one of the keywords will turn
on the corresponding set membership bit.  Literal numbers may also be used and
may, thereby, set or clear more than one bit.  Preceding a keyword or literal
number with a bang (@code{!}  - exclamation point) will turn the bit(s) off.
The number of keywords allowed is constrained by the number of bits in a
pointer, as the bit set is kept in a @code{void*}.

If, for example, you specified @code{first} in your list of keywords,
then you can use the following code to test to see if either @code{first}
or @code{all} was specified:

@example
uintptr_t opt = OPT_VALUE_OPTN_NAME;
if (opt & OPTN_NAME_FIRST)
    /* OPTN_NAME_FIRST bit was set */ ;
@end example

AutoOpts produces a special purpose procedure for this option.
To set multiple bits as the default (initial) value, you must
specify an initial numeric value (which might become inaccurate over
time), or else specify @code{arg-default} multiple times.  Do not
specify a series of names conjoined with @code{+} symbols as the
value for any of the @code{arg-default} attributes.  That works for
option parsing, but not for the option code generation.

@node arg-type hierarchy
@subsubsection Arg Type Hierarchical
@code{arg-type = hierarchy;}
@*
@code{arg-type = nested;}

This denotes an option with a structure-valued argument, a.k.a.
``subopts'' in @code{getopts} terminology.  The argument is parsed
and the values made available to the program via the find and
find next calls (@xref{libopts-optionFindValue},
@xref{libopts-optionGetValue}, and
@pxref{libopts-optionFindNextValue}).

@example
tOptionValue * val = optionGetValue(VALUE_OPT_OPTN_NAME, "name");
while (val != NULL) @{
  process(val);
  val = optionNextValue(VALUE_OPT_OPTN_NAME, val);
  if (wrong_name(val, "name"))
    break;
@}
@end example


@node arg-type file name
@subsubsection Arg Type File Name
@code{arg-type = file;}

This argument type will have some validations on the argument and,
optionally, actually open the file.  You must specify several additonal
attributes for the option:

@table @samp
@item file-exists
@vindex file-exists
If not specified or empty, then the directory portion of the name is checked.
The directory must exist or the argument is rejected and the usage procedure
is invoked.

Otherwise, both the directory as above and the full name is tested for
existence.  If the value begins with the two letters ``no'', then the file
must not pre-exist.  Otherwise, the file is expected to exist.

@item open-file
@vindex open-file
If not specified or empty, the file is left alone.
If the value begins with the four letters ``desc''[@i{riptor}], then
@code{open(2)} is used and @code{optArg.argFd} is set.  Otherwise, the
file is opened with @code{fopen} and @code{optArg.argFp} is set.

@item file-mode
@vindex file-mode
If ``open-file'' is set and not empty, then you must specify the open mode.
Set the value to the flag bits or mode string as appropriate for the open
type.
@end table


@node arg-type time-duration
@subsubsection Arg Type Time Duration
@code{arg-type = time-duration;}

The argument will be converted into a number of seconds.  It may be
a multi-part number with different parts being multiplied into a seconds
value and added into the final result.  Valid forms are in the table
below.  Upper cased letters represent numbers that must be used in the
expressions.

@table @samp
@item [[HH:]MM:]SS
@code{HH} is multiplied by @code{3600} and @code{MM} multiplied by @code{60}
before they are added to @code{SS}.  This time specification may not be
followed by any other time specs.  @code{HH} and @code{MM} are both optional,
though @code{HH} cannot be specified without @code{MM}.

@item DAYS d
@code{DAYS} is multiplied by the number of seconds in a day.  This value may
be followed by (and added to) values specified by @code{HH:MM:SS} or the
suffixed values below.  If present, it must always be first.

@item HRS h
@code{HRS} is multiplied by the number of seconds in an hour.  This value may
be followed by (and added to) values specified by @code{MM:SS} or the
suffixed values below.

@item MINS m
@code{MINS} is multiplied by the number of seconds in a minute.  This value may
be followed by (and added to) a count of seconds.

@item SECS s
This value can only be the last value in a time specification.  The @code{s}
suffix is optional.
@end table

@example
   5 d 1:10:05    ==> 5 days + 1 hour 10 minutes and 5 seconds
   5 d 1 h 10 m 5 ==> yields: 436205 seconds
   5d1h10m5s      ==> same result -- spaces are optional.
@end example

When saved into a config file, the value will be stored as a simple count
of seconds.  There are actually more (many) accepted time duration strings.
The full documentation can be found with ISO-8601 documentation and the
more extedded documentation when ``parse_duration()'' becomes more widely
available.


@node arg-type time-date
@subsubsection Arg Type Time and Date
@code{arg-type = time-date;}

The argument will be converted into the number of seconds since the epoch.
The conversion rules are very complicated, please see the @file{getdate_r(3GNU)}
man page.  There are some additional restrictions:

@enumerate
@item
Your project must be compiled with @code{PKGDATADIR} defined and naming a
valid directory.
@item
The @code{DATEMSK} environment variable will be set to the @file{datemsk} file
within that directory.
@end enumerate

If that file is not accessible for any reason, the string will be
parsed as a time duration (@pxref{arg-type time-duration}) instead of a
specific date and time.

@node arg-keyword
@subsubsection Keyword list
@vindex keyword
If the @code{arg-type} is @code{keyword} (@pxref{arg-type keyword}) or
@code{set-membership} (@pxref{arg-type set membership}), then you must specify
the list of keywords by a series of @code{keyword} entries.  The interface
file will contain values for @code{@i{<OPTN_NAME>}_@i{<KEYWORD>}} for each
keyword entry.  @code{keyword} option types will have an enumeration and
@code{set-membership} option types will have a set of unsigned bits
@code{#define}-d.

If the @code{arg-type} is specifically @code{keyword}, you may also add
special handling code with a
@vindex extra-code
@code{extra-code} attribute.  After @code{optionEnumerationVal} has
converted the input string into an enumeration, you may insert code to
process this enumeration value (@code{pOptDesc->optArg.argEnum}).

@node arg-optional
@subsubsection Option Argument Optional
@vindex arg-optional
This attribute indicates that the user does not have to supply an argument for
the option.  This is only valid if the @var{arg-type} is @code{string}
(@pxref{arg-type string}) or @code{keyword} (@pxref{arg-type keyword}).  If it
is @code{keyword}, then this attribute may also specify the default keyword to
assume when the argument is not supplied.  If left empty, @var{arg-default}
(@pxref{arg-default}) or the zero-valued keyword will be used.

This is overridden and the options are required if the libopts library
gets configured with @code{--disable-optional-args}.

@node arg-default
@subsubsection Default Option Argument Value
@vindex arg-default
This specifies the default option argument value to be used when the option is
not specified or preset.  You may specify multiple @code{arg-default} values if
the argument type is @code{set membership}.

@node Option Argument Handling
@subsection Option Argument Handling
@cindex Option Argument Handling

AutoOpts will either specify or automatically generate callback procedures
for options that take specialized arguments.  The only option argument types
that are not specialized are plain string arguments and no argument at all.
For options that fall into one of those two categories, you may specify your
own callback function, as specified below.  If you do this and if you
specify that options are resettable (@pxref{automatic options}), then your
option handling code @strong{must} look for the @code{OPTST_RESET} bit in
the @code{fOptState} field of the option descriptor.

If the option takes a string argument, then you may specify that the option
is to be handled by the @code{libopts} library procedures
@code{stackOptArg()} or @code{unstackOptArg()} (see below).  In this case,
you may not provide option handling code.

Finally, @code{documentation} options (@pxref{opt-attr documentation}) may
also be marked as @code{settable} (@pxref{opt-attr settable}) and have special
callback functions (either @code{flag-code}, @code{extract-code}, or
@code{call-proc}).

@table @samp
@item flag-code
@vindex flag-code
statements to execute when the option is encountered.
The generated procedure will look like this:

@example
static void
doOpt<name>( tOptions* pOptions, tOptDesc* pOptDesc )
@{
<flag-code>
@}
@end example

Only certain fields within the @code{tOptions} and @code{tOptDesc}
structures may be accessed.  @xref{Option Processing Data}.

@item extract-code
@vindex extract-code
This is effectively identical to @code{flag-code}, except that the
source is kept in the output file instead of the definitions file.
A long comment is used to demarcate the code.  You must not modify
that marker.  @i{Before} regenerating the option code file,
the old file is renamed from MUMBLE.c to MUMBLE.c.save.  The template
will be looking there for the text to copy into the new output file.

@item call-proc
@vindex call-proc
external procedure to call when option is encountered.  The calling
sequence must conform to the sequence defined above for the generated
procedure, @code{doOpt<name>}.  It has the same restrictions
regarding the fields within the structures passed in as arguments.
@xref{Option Processing Data}.

@item flag-proc
@vindex flag-proc
Name of another option whose @code{flag-code} can be executed
when this option is encountered.

@item stack-arg
@vindex stack-arg
Call a special library routine to stack the option's arguments.  Special
macros in the interface file are provided for determining how many of the
options were found (@code{STACKCT_OPT(NAME)}) and to obtain a pointer to a
list of pointers to the argument values (@code{STACKLST_OPT(NAME)}).
Obviously, for a stackable argument, the @code{max} attribute
(@pxref{Common Attributes}) needs to be set higher than @code{1}.

If this stacked argument option has a disablement prefix, then the entire
stack of arguments will be cleared by specifying the option with that
disablement prefix.

@item unstack-arg
@vindex unstack-arg
Call a special library routine to remove (``unstack'') strings
from a @code{stack-arg} option stack.  This attribute must name
the option that is to be ``unstacked''.  Neither this option nor
the stacked argument option it references may be equivalenced to
another option.
@end table

@node Internationalizing Options
@subsection Internationalizing Options
@cindex Internationalizing Options

Normally, AutoOpts produces usage text that is difficult to translate.  It is
pieced together on the fly using words and phrases scattered around here and
there, piecing together toe document.  This does not translate well.

Incorporated into this package are some ways around the problem.  First, you
should specify the @code{full-usage} and @code{short-usage} program attributes
(@pxref{program attributes}).  This will enable your translators to translate
the usage text as a whole.

Your translators will also be able to translate long option names.  The option
name translations will then become the names searched for both on the command
line and in configuration files.  However, it will not affect the names of
environment variable names used to configure your program.

If it is considered desireable to keep configuration files in the ``C''
locale, then several macros are available to suppress or delay the
translations of option names at run time.  These are all disabled if
@code{ENABLE_NLS} is not defined at compile time.  These macros @strong{must}
be invoked before the first invocation of @code{optionProcess}.

@table @samp
@item  OPT_NO_XLAT_CFG_NAMES;
@itemx OPT_XLAT_CFG_NAMES;
Disable (or enable) the translations of option names for configuration files.
If you enable translation for config files, then they will be translated for
command line options.

@item  OPT_NO_XLAT_OPT_NAMES;
@itemx OPT_XLAT_OPT_NAMES;
Disable (or enable) the translations of option names for command line
processing.  If you disable the translation for command line processing,
you will also disable it for configuration file processing.  Once translated,
the option names will remain translated.
@end table

@node documentation attributes
@subsection Man and Info doc Attributes
@cindex documentation attributes

AutoOpts includes AutoGen templates for producing abbreviated man pages
and for producing the invoking section of an info document.  To take
advantage of these templates, you must add several attributes to your
option definitions.

@table @samp
@item arg-name
@vindex arg-name
If an option has an argument, the argument should have a name for
documentation purposes.  It will default to @code{arg-type}, but
it will likely be clearer with something else like, @code{file-name}
instead of @code{string} (the type).

@item doc
@vindex doc
First, every @code{flag} definition @emph{other than} ``documentation''
definitions, must have a @code{doc} attribute defined.  If the option takes
an argument, then it will need an @code{arg-name} attribute as well.  The
@code{doc} text should be in plain sentences with minimal formatting.  The
Texinfo commands @code{@@code}, and @code{@@var} will have its enclosed text
made into @strong{\fB} entries in the man page, and the @code{@@file} text
will be made into @strong{\fI} entries.  The @code{arg-name} attribute is
used to display the option's argument in the man page.

Options marked with the ``documentation'' attribute are for documenting
the usage text.  All other options should have the ``doc'' attribute in
order to document the usage of the option in the generated man pages.

@item option-info
@vindex option-info
This text will be inserted as a lead-in paragraph in the @code{OPTIONS}
section of the generated man page.

@item doc-section
@vindex doc-section
This is a compound attribute that requires three @i{sub}attributes:
@table @i
@item ds-type
This describes the section type.  Basically, the title of the section
that will be added to all output documentation.  There may be only one
@code{doc-section} for any given @code{ds-type}.  If there are duplicates,
the results are undefined (it might work, it might not).

There are five categories of @code{ds-type} sections.
They are those that the documentation templates would otherwise:
@enumerate
@item
always create itself, ignoring any @code{ds-type}s by this name.
These are marked, below, as @code{ao-only}.
@item
create, if none have been provided.
These are marked, @code{alternate}.
@item
create, but augment if the @code{doc-section} was provided.
These are marked, @code{augments}.
@item
do nothing, but inserts them into the output in a prescribed order.
These are marked, @code{known}
@item
knows nothing about them.  They will be alphabetized and inserted
after the list of leading sections and before the list of trailing
sections.  These are not marked because I don't know their names.
@end enumerate

Some of these are emitted by the documentation templates only if
certain conditions are met.  If there are conditions, they are
explained below.  If there are no conditions, then you will always
see the named section in the output.

The output sections will appear in this order:
@table @samp
@item NAME
@code{ao-only}.
@item SYNOPSIS
@code{alternate}.
@item DESCRIPTION
@code{augments}.
@item OPTIONS
@code{ao-only}.
@item OPTION PRESETS
@code{ao-only}, if environment presets or configuration file processing
has been specified.
@item unknown
At this point, the unknown, alphabetized sections are inserted.
@item IMPLEMENTATION NOTES
@code{known}
@item ENVIRONMENT
@code{augments}, if environment presets have been specified.
@item FILES
@code{augments}, if configuration file processing has been specified.
@item EXAMPLES
@code{known}
@item EXIT STATUS
@code{augments}.
@item ERRORS
@code{known}
@item COMPATIBILITY
@code{known}
@item SEE ALSO
@code{known}
@item CONFORMING TO
@code{known}
@item HISTORY
@code{known}
@item AUTHORS
@code{alternate}, if the @code{copyright} stanza has either
an @code{author} or an @code{owner} attribute.
@item COPYRIGHT
@code{alternate}, if there is a @code{copyright} stanza.
@item BUGS
@code{augments}, if the @code{copyright} stanza has an
@code{eaddr} attribute.
@item NOTES
@code{augments}.
@end table

@item ds-format
This describes the format of the associated @code{ds-text} section.
@code{man}, @code{mdoc} and @code{texi} formats are supported.
Regardless of the chosen format, the formatting tags in the output
text will be converted to @code{man} macros for @code{man} pages,
@code{mdoc} macros for @code{mdoc} pages, and @code{texi} macros for
@code{texinfo} pages.
@item ds-text
This is the descriptive text, written according to the rules for
@code{ds-format} documents.
@end table

Here is an example of a ``doc-section'' for a ``SEE ALSO'' type.

@example
doc-section = @{
  ds-type   = 'SEE ALSO'; // or anything else
  ds-format = 'man';      // or texi or mdoc format
  ds-text   = <<-_EOText_
	text relevant to this section type,
	in the chosen format
	_EOText_;
@};
@end example

@item prog-man-descrip
@itemx prog-info-descrip
@vindex prog-man-descrip
@vindex prog-info-descrip
These attributes are now deprecated.
Please use a @code{doc-section} stanza with a @code{ds-type}
attribute set to @code{DESCRIPTION} instead.

@item detail
@vindex detail
This attribute is used to add a very short explanation about what
a program is used for when the ``title'' attribute is insufficient.
If there is no ``doc-section'' stanza of type ``DESCRIPTION'', then
this text is used for the man page DESCRIPTION section, too.
@end table

@node automatic options
@subsection Automatically Supported Options
@cindex automatic options

AutoOpts provides automated support for several options.  @code{help} and
@code{more-help} are always provided.  The others are conditional upon
various global program attributes being defined @xref{program attributes}.

Below are the option names and default flag values.  The flags are activated
if and only if at least one user-defined option also uses a flag value.  The
long names are supported as option names if @code{long-opts} has been
specified.  These option flags may be deleted or changed to characters of your
choosing by specifying
@vindex more-help-value
@vindex usage-value
@vindex version-value
@vindex load-opts-value
@vindex reset-value
@code{xxx-value = "y";}, where @code{xxx} is one of the
option names below and @code{y} is either empty or the character of your choice.
For example, to change the help flag from @code{?} to @code{h}, specify
@vindex help-value
@code{help-value = "h";}; and to require that @code{save-opts} be specified
only with its long option name, specify
@vindex save-opts-value
@code{save-opts-value = "";}.

Additionally, the procedure that prints out the program version may be
replaced by specifying @code{version-proc}.
@vindex version-proc
This procedure must be defined to be of external scope (non-static).
By default, the AutoOpts library provides @code{optionPrintVersion}
and it will be the specified callback function in the option
definition structure.

With the exception of the @code{load-opts} option, none of these automatically
supported options will be recognized in configuration files or environment
variables.

@table @samp
@item help -?
This option will immediately invoke the @code{USAGE()} procedure
and display the usage line, a description of each option with
its description and option usage information.  This is followed
by the contents of the definition of the @code{detail} text macro.

@item more-help -!
This option is identical to the @code{help} option, except that the
output is passed through a pager program.  (@code{more} by default, or
the program identified by the @code{PAGER} environment variable.)

@item usage -u
This option must be requested by specifying, @code{usage-opt} in the option
definition file.  It will produce abbreviated help text to @file{stdout} and
exit with zero status (@code{EXIT_SUCCESS}).

@item version -v
This will print the program name, title and version.  If it is followed by
the letter @code{c} and a value for @code{copyright} and @code{owner} have
been provided, then the copyright will be printed, too.  If it is followed
by the letter @code{n}, then the full copyright notice (if available) will
be printed.  The @code{version} attribute must be specified in the option
definition file.

@item load-opts -<
@cindex configuration file
This option will load options from the named file.  They will be treated
exactly as if they were loaded from the normally found configuration files,
but will not be loaded until the option is actually processed.  This can also
be used within another configuration file, causing them to nest.  This is the
@strong{only} automatically supported option that can be activated inside of
config files or with environment variables.

Specifying the negated form of the option (@code{--no-load-opts}) will
suppress the processing of configuration files and environment variables.

This option is activated by specifying one or more @code{homerc} attributes.

@item save-opts ->
@cindex configuration file
This option will cause the option state to be printed in the configuration file
format when option processing is done but not yet verified for consistency.
The program will terminate successfully without running when this has
completed.  Note that for most shells you will have to quote or escape the
flag character to restrict special meanings to the shell.

The output file will be the configuration file name (default or provided by
@code{rcfile}) in the last directory named in a @code{homerc} definition.

This option may be set from within your program by invoking the
"@code{SET_OPT_SAVE_OPTS(@i{filename})}" macro (@pxref{SET_OPT_name}).
Invoking this macro will set the file name for saving the option processing
state, but the state will @strong{not} actually be saved.  You must call
@code{optionSaveFile} to do that (@pxref{libopts-optionSaveFile}).
@strong{CAVEAT:} if, after invoking this macro, you call
@code{optionProcess}, the option processing state will be saved to this file
and @code{optionProcess} will not return.  You may wish to invoke
@code{CLEAR_OPT( SAVE_OPTS )} (@pxref{CLEAR_OPT}) beforehand if you do need
to reinvoke @code{optionProcess}.

This option is activated by specifying one or more @code{homerc} attributes.

@item reset-option -R
This option takes the name of an option for the current program and resets its
state such that it is set back to its original, compile-time initialized
value.  If the option state is subsequently stored (via @code{--save-opts}),
the named option will not appear in that file.

This option is activated by specifying the @code{resettable} attribute.

@strong{BEWARE}:  If the @code{resettable} attribute is specified, all
option callbacks @strong{must} look for the @code{OPTST_RESET} bit in the
@code{fOptState} field of the option descriptor.  If set, the @code{optCookie}
and @code{optArg} fields will be unchanged from their last setting.  When the
callback returns, these fields will be set to their original values.  If you
use this feature and you have allocated data hanging off of the cookie, you
need to deallocate it.
@end table

@node standard options
@subsection Library of Standard Options
@cindex standard options

AutoOpts has developed a set of standardized options.
You may incorporate these options in your program simply by @emph{first}
adding a @code{#define} for the options you want, and then the line,

@example
#include stdoptions.def
@end example

@noindent
in your option definitions.  The supported options are specified thus:

@example
#define DEBUG
#define DIRECTORY
#define DRY_RUN
#define INPUT
#define INTERACTIVE
#define OUTPUT
#define WARN

#define SILENT
#define QUIET
#define BRIEF
#define VERBOSE
@end example

By default, only the long form of the option will be available.
To specify the short (flag) form, suffix these names with @code{_FLAG}.
e.g.,

@example
#define DEBUG_FLAG
@end example

@code{--silent}, @code{--quiet}, @code{--brief} and @code{--verbose} are
related in that they all indicate some level of diagnostic output.
These options are all designed to conflict with each other.
Instead of four different options, however, several levels can be
incorporated by @code{#define}-ing @code{VERBOSE_ENUM}.  In conjunction
with @code{VERBOSE}, it incorporates the notion of @i{5} levels in an
enumeration: @code{silent}, @code{quiet}, @code{brief},
@code{informative} and @code{verbose}; with the default being
@code{brief}.

@ignore
END   == AUTOOPTS-MAIN == DO NOT CHANGE THIS COMMENT or the surrounding 'ignore's
Extraction from autogen.texi
@end ignore
Here is an example program that uses the following set of definitions:

@example
AutoGen Definitions options;

prog-name  = default-test;
prog-title = 'Default Option Example';
homerc     = '$$/../share/default-test', '$HOME', '.';
environrc;
long-opts;
gnu-usage;
usage-opt;
version    = '1.0';
main = @{
  main-type = shell-process;
@};
#define DEBUG_FLAG
#define WARN_FLAG
#define WARN_LEVEL
#define VERBOSE_FLAG
#define VERBOSE_ENUM
#define DRY_RUN_FLAG
#define OUTPUT_FLAG
#define INPUT_FLAG
#define DIRECTORY_FLAG
#define INTERACTIVE_FLAG
#include stdoptions.def
@end example

@noindent
Running a few simple commands on that definition file:

@example
autogen default-test.def
copts="-DTEST_DEFAULT_TEST_OPTS `autoopts-config cflags`"
lopts="`autoopts-config ldflags`"
cc -o default-test $@{copts@} default-test.c $@{lopts@}
@end example

@noindent
Yields a program which, when run with @file{--help}, prints out:

@example
default-test - Default Option Example - Ver. 1.0
USAGE:  default-test [ -<flag> [<val>] | --<name>[@{=| @}<val>] ]...


The following options are commonly used and are provided and supported
by AutoOpts:

   -D, --debug                run program with debugging info
   -V, --verbose=KWd          run program with progress info
   -w, --warn=num             specify a warning-level threshhold
                                - disabled as --no-warn
   -R, --dry-run              program will make no changes
   -I, --interactive=str      prompt for confirmation
   -i, --input=str            redirect input from file
   -o, --output=str           redirect output to file
   -d, --directory=str        use specified dir for I/O

version and help options:

   -v, --version[=arg]        Output version information and exit
   -?, --help                 Display extended usage information and exit
   -!, --more-help            Extended usage information passed thru pager
   -u, --usage                Abbreviated usage to stdout
   ->, --save-opts[=arg]      Save the option state to a config file
   -<, --load-opts=str        Load options from a config file
                                - disabled as --no-load-opts
                                - may appear multiple times

Options are specified by doubled hyphens and their name or by a single
hyphen and the flag character.

The following option preset mechanisms are supported:
 - reading file $$/../share/default-test
 - reading file $HOME/.default_testrc
 - reading file ./.default_testrc
 - examining environment variables named DEFAULT_TEST_*

The valid "verbose" option keywords are:
  silent quiet brief informative verbose
  or an integer from 0 through 4
Packaged by Bruce (2012-02-26)
Report default_test bugs to bkorb@@gnu.org
@end example
@ignore
START == AUTOOPTS-API == DO NOT CHANGE THIS COMMENT or the surrounding 'ignore's
Extraction from autogen.texi
@end ignore

@c === SECTION MARKER

@node AutoOpts API
@section Programmatic Interface
@cindex AutoOpts API

The user interface for access to the argument information is completely
defined in the generated header file and in the portions of the
distributed file "options.h" that are marked "public".

In the following macros, text marked @code{<NAME>} or @code{name}
is the name of the option @strong{in upper case} and @strong{segmented
with underscores @code{_}}.  The macros and enumerations defined in the
options header (interface) file are used as follows:

To see how these @code{#define} macros are used in a program,
the reader is referred to the several @file{opts.h} files
included with the AutoGen sources.

@menu
* Option Processing Data::  Data for Option Processing
* CLEAR_OPT::               CLEAR_OPT( <NAME> ) - Clear Option Markings
* COUNT_OPT::               COUNT_OPT( <NAME> ) - Definition Count
* DESC::                    DESC( <NAME> ) - Option Descriptor
* DISABLE_OPT_name::        DISABLE_OPT_name - Disable an option
* ENABLED_OPT::             ENABLED_OPT( <NAME> ) - Is Option Enabled?
* ERRSKIP_OPTERR::          ERRSKIP_OPTERR - Ignore Option Errors
* ERRSTOP_OPTERR::          ERRSTOP_OPTERR - Stop on Errors
* HAVE_OPT::                HAVE_OPT( <NAME> ) - Have this option?
* ISSEL_OPT::               ISSEL_OPT( <NAME> ) - Is Option Selected?
* ISUNUSED_OPT::            ISUNUSED_OPT( <NAME> ) - Never Specified?
* OPTION_CT::               OPTION_CT - Full Count of Options
* OPT_ARG::                 OPT_ARG( <NAME> ) - Option Argument String
* OPT_NO_XLAT_CFG_NAMES::   OPT_NO_XLAT_CFG_NAMES - option name xlation
* OPT_NO_XLAT_OPT_NAMES::   OPT_NO_XLAT_OPT_NAMES - option name xlation
* OPT_VALUE_name::          OPT_VALUE_name - Option Argument Value
* OPT_XLAT_CFG_NAMES::      OPT_XLAT_CFG_NAMES - option name xlation
* OPT_XLAT_OPT_NAMES::      OPT_XLAT_OPT_NAMES - option name xlation
* RESTART_OPT::             RESTART_OPT( n ) - Resume Option Processing
* SET_OPT_name::            SET_OPT_name - Force an option to be set
* STACKCT_OPT::             STACKCT_OPT( <NAME> ) - Stacked Arg Count
* STACKLST_OPT::            STACKLST_OPT( <NAME> ) - Argument Stack
* START_OPT::               START_OPT - Restart Option Processing
* STATE_OPT::               STATE_OPT( <NAME> ) - Option State
* USAGE::                   USAGE( exit-code ) - Usage invocation macro
* VALUE_OPT_name::          VALUE_OPT_name - Option Flag Value
* VERSION::                 VERSION - Version and Full Version
* WHICH_IDX_name::          WHICH_IDX_name - Which Equivalenced Index
* WHICH_OPT_name::          WHICH_OPT_name - Which Equivalenced Option
* teOptIndex::              teOptIndex - Option Index and Enumeration
* OPTIONS_STRUCT_VERSION::  OPTIONS_STRUCT_VERSION - active version
* libopts procedures::      libopts External Procedures
@end menu

@node Option Processing Data
@subsection Data for Option Processing
@cindex Option Processing Data

This section describes the data that may be accessed from within the
option processing callback routines.  The following fields may be used
in the following ways and may be used for read only.  The first set is
addressed from the @code{tOptDesc*} pointer:

@table @samp
@cindex optIndex
@item optIndex
@cindex optValue
@item optValue
These may be used by option procedures to determine which option they
are working on (in case they handle several options).

@cindex optActualIndex
@item optActualIndex
@cindex optActualValue
@item optActualValue
These may be used by option procedures to determine which option was
used to set the current option.  This may be different from the above if
the options are members of an equivalence class.

@cindex optOccCt
@item optOccCt
If AutoOpts is processing command line arguments, then this value will
contain the current occurrence count.  During the option preset phase
(reading configuration files and examining environment variables), the value is
zero.

@cindex fOptState
@item fOptState
The field may be tested for the following bit values
(prefix each name with @code{OPTST_}, e.g. @code{OPTST_INIT}):

@table @samp
@item INIT
Initial compiled value.  As a bit test, it will always yield FALSE.

@item SET
The option was set via the @code{SET_OPT()} macro.

@item PRESET
@cindex configuration file
The option was set via a configuration file.

@item DEFINED
The option was set via a command line option.

@item SET_MASK
This is a mask of flags that show the set state, one of the
above four values.

@item EQUIVALENCE
This bit is set when the option was selected by an equivalenced option.

@item DISABLED
This bit is set if the option is to be disabled.
(Meaning it was a long option prefixed by the disablement prefix, or
the option has not been specified yet and initializes as @code{disabled}.)
@end table

As an example of how this might be used, in AutoGen I want to allow
template writers to specify that the template output can be left
in a writable or read-only state.  To support this, there is a Guile
function named @code{set-writable} (@pxref{SCM set-writable}).
Also, I provide for command options @code{--writable} and
@code{--not-writable}.  I give precedence to command line and RC
file options, thus:

@example
switch (STATE_OPT( WRITABLE )) @{
case OPTST_DEFINED:
case OPTST_PRESET:
    fprintf(stderr, zOverrideWarn, pCurTemplate->pzFileName,
            pCurMacro->lineNo);
    break;

default:
    if (gh_boolean_p( set ) && (set == SCM_BOOL_F))
        CLEAR_OPT( WRITABLE );
    else
        SET_OPT_WRITABLE;
@}
@end example

@cindex pzLastArg
@item pzLastArg
Pointer to the latest argument string.  BEWARE@: If the argument type
is numeric, an enumeration or a bit mask, then this will be the
argument @strong{value} and not a pointer to a string.
@end table

The following two fields are addressed from the @code{tOptions*} pointer:

@table @samp
@cindex pzProgName
@item pzProgName
Points to a NUL-terminated string containing the current program
name, as retrieved from the argument vector.

@cindex pzProgPath
@item pzProgPath
Points to a NUL-terminated string containing the full path of
the current program, as retrieved from the argument vector.
(If available on your system.)

@end table

Note@:  these fields get filled in during the first call to
@code{optionProcess()}.  All other fields are private, for the exclusive
use of AutoOpts code and are subject to change.

@node CLEAR_OPT
@subsection CLEAR_OPT( <NAME> ) - Clear Option Markings
@findex CLEAR_OPT

Make as if the option had never been specified.
@code{HAVE_OPT(<NAME>)} will yield @code{FALSE}
after invoking this macro.

@node COUNT_OPT
@subsection COUNT_OPT( <NAME> ) - Definition Count
@findex COUNT_OPT

This macro will tell you how many times the option was
specified on the command line.  It does not include counts
of preset options.

@example
if (COUNT_OPT( NAME ) != desired-count) @{
    make-an-undesirable-message.
@}
@end example

@node DESC
@subsection DESC( <NAME> ) - Option Descriptor
@findex DESC

This macro is used internally by other AutoOpt macros.
It is not for general use.  It is used to obtain the option description
corresponding to its @strong{UPPER CASED} option name argument.
This is primarily used in other macro definitions.

@node DISABLE_OPT_name
@subsection DISABLE_OPT_name - Disable an option
@findex DISABLE_OPT_name

This macro is emitted if it is both settable
and it can be disabled.  If it cannot be disabled, it may
always be CLEAR-ed (see above).

The form of the macro will actually depend on whether the
option is equivalenced to another, and/or has an assigned
handler procedure.  Unlike the @code{SET_OPT} macro,
this macro does not allow an option argument.

@example
DISABLE_OPT_NAME;
@end example

@node ENABLED_OPT
@subsection ENABLED_OPT( <NAME> ) - Is Option Enabled?
@findex ENABLED_OPT

Yields true if the option defaults to disabled and
@code{ISUNUSED_OPT()} would yield true.  It also yields true if
the option has been specified with a disablement prefix,
disablement value or the @code{DISABLE_OPT_NAME} macro was invoked.

@node ERRSKIP_OPTERR
@subsection ERRSKIP_OPTERR - Ignore Option Errors
@findex ERRSKIP_OPTERR

When it is necessary to continue (return to caller)
on option errors, invoke this option.  It is reversible.
@xref{ERRSTOP_OPTERR}.

@node ERRSTOP_OPTERR
@subsection ERRSTOP_OPTERR - Stop on Errors
@findex ERRSTOP_OPTERR

After invoking this macro, if @code{optionProcess()}
encounters an error, it will call @code{exit(1)} rather than return.
This is the default processing mode.  It can be overridden by
specifying @code{allow-errors} in the definitions file,
or invoking the macro @xref{ERRSKIP_OPTERR}.

@node HAVE_OPT
@subsection HAVE_OPT( <NAME> ) - Have this option?
@findex HAVE_OPT

This macro yields true if the option has been specified
in any fashion at all.  It is used thus:

@example
if (HAVE_OPT( NAME )) @{
    <do-things-associated-with-opt-name>;
@}
@end example

@node ISSEL_OPT
@subsection ISSEL_OPT( <NAME> ) - Is Option Selected?
@findex ISSEL_OPT

This macro yields true if the option has been
specified either on the command line or via a SET/DISABLE macro.

@node ISUNUSED_OPT
@subsection ISUNUSED_OPT( <NAME> ) - Never Specified?
@findex ISUNUSED_OPT

This macro yields true if the option has
never been specified, or has been cleared via the
@code{CLEAR_OPT()} macro.

@node OPTION_CT
@subsection OPTION_CT - Full Count of Options
@findex OPTION_CT

The full count of all options, both those defined
and those generated automatically by AutoOpts.  This is primarily
used to initialize the program option descriptor structure.

@node OPT_ARG
@subsection OPT_ARG( <NAME> ) - Option Argument String
@findex OPT_ARG

The option argument value as a pointer to string.  Note that argument
values that have been specified as numbers are stored as numbers or
keywords.  For such options, use instead the @code{OPT_VALUE_name}
define.  It is used thus:

@example
if (HAVE_OPT( NAME )) @{
    char* p = OPT_ARG( NAME );
    <do-things-with-opt-name-argument-string>;
@}
@end example

@node OPT_NO_XLAT_CFG_NAMES
@subsection OPT_NO_XLAT_CFG_NAMES - option name xlation
@findex OPT_NO_XLAT_CFG_NAMES

Invoking this macro will disable the translation of option names only while
processing configuration files and environment variables.  This must be
invoked before the first call to @code{optionProcess}..  You need not invoke
this if your option definition file contains the attribute assignment,
``@code{no-xlate = opt-cfg;}''.

@node OPT_NO_XLAT_OPT_NAMES
@subsection OPT_NO_XLAT_OPT_NAMES - option name xlation
@findex OPT_NO_XLAT_OPT_NAMES

Invoking this macro will completely disable the translation of option names.
This must be invoked before the first call to @code{optionProcess}.  You need
not invoke this if your option definition file contains the attribute
assignment, ``@code{no-xlate = opt;}''.

@node OPT_VALUE_name
@subsection OPT_VALUE_name - Option Argument Value
@findex OPT_VALUE_name

This macro gets emitted only for options that take numeric, keyword or set
membership arguments.  The macro yields a word-sized integer containing the
enumeration, bit set or numeric value for the option argument.

@example
int opt_val = OPT_VALUE_name;
@end example

@node OPT_XLAT_CFG_NAMES
@subsection OPT_XLAT_CFG_NAMES - option name xlation
@findex OPT_XLAT_CFG_NAMES

If @code{ENABLE_NLS} is defined, this macro will cause the translation of
option names to happen before starting the processing of configuration files
and environment variables.  This will change the recognition of options within
the @code{$PROGRAMNAME} environment variable, but will not alter the names
used for setting options via @code{$PROGRAMNAME_name} environment variables.

This must be invoked before the first call to @code{optionProcess}.  You might
need to use this macro if your option definition file contains the attribute
assignment, ``@code{no-xlate = opt;}'' or ``@code{no-xlate = opt-cfg;}'', and
you have determined in some way that you wish to override that.

@node OPT_XLAT_OPT_NAMES
@subsection OPT_XLAT_OPT_NAMES - option name xlation
@findex OPT_XLAT_OPT_NAMES

If @code{ENABLE_NLS} is defined, translate the option names before processing
the command line options.  Long option names may thus be localized.
(If the names were translated before configuration processing, they will
not be re-translated.)

This must be invoked before the first call to @code{optionProcess}.  You might
need to use this macro if your option definition file contains the attribute
assignment, ``@code{no-xlate = opt;}'' and you have determined in some way that
you wish to override that.

@node RESTART_OPT
@subsection RESTART_OPT( n ) - Resume Option Processing
@findex RESTART_OPT

If option processing has stopped (either because of an error
or something was encountered that looked like a program argument),
it can be resumed by providing this macro with the index @code{n}
of the next option to process and calling @code{optionProcess()} again.

@node SET_OPT_name
@subsection SET_OPT_name - Force an option to be set
@findex SET_OPT_name

This macro gets emitted only when the given
option has the @code{settable} attribute specified.

The form of the macro will actually depend on whether the option is
equivalenced to another, has an option argument and/or has an assigned
handler procedure.  If the option has an argument, then this macro will
too.  Beware that the argument is not reallocated, so the value must not
be on the stack or deallocated in any other way for as long as the value
might get referenced.

If you have supplied at least one @file{homerc} file
(@pxref{program attributes}), this macro will be emitted for the
@code{--save-opts} option.

@example
SET_OPT_SAVE_OPTS( "filename" );
@end example

@noindent
@xref{automatic options}, for a discussion of the implications of using
this particular example.

@node STACKCT_OPT
@subsection STACKCT_OPT( <NAME> ) - Stacked Arg Count
@findex STACKCT_OPT

When the option handling attribute is specified
as @code{stack_arg}, this macro may be used to determine how
many of them actually got stacked.

Do not use this on options that have not been stacked or has not been
specified (the @code{stack_arg} attribute must have been specified,
and @code{HAVE_OPT(<NAME>)} must yield TRUE).
Otherwise, you will likely seg fault.

@example
if (HAVE_OPT( NAME )) @{
    int     ct = STACKCT_OPT(  NAME );
    char**  pp = STACKLST_OPT( NAME );

    do  @{
        char* p = *pp++;
        do-things-with-p;
    @} while (--ct > 0);
@}
@end example

@node STACKLST_OPT
@subsection STACKLST_OPT( <NAME> ) - Argument Stack
@findex STACKLST_OPT

The address of the list of pointers to the
option arguments.  The pointers are ordered by the order in
which they were encountered in the option presets and
command line processing.

Do not use this on options that have not been stacked or has not been
specified (the @code{stack_arg} attribute must have been specified,
and @code{HAVE_OPT(<OPTION>)} must yield TRUE).
Otherwise, you will likely seg fault.

@example
if (HAVE_OPT( NAME )) @{
    int     ct = STACKCT_OPT(  NAME );
    char**  pp = STACKLST_OPT( NAME );

    do  @{
        char* p = *pp++;
        do-things-with-p;
    @} while (--ct > 0);
@}
@end example

@node START_OPT
@subsection START_OPT - Restart Option Processing
@findex START_OPT

This is just a shortcut for RESTART_OPT(1) (@xref{RESTART_OPT}.)

@node STATE_OPT
@subsection STATE_OPT( <NAME> ) - Option State
@findex STATE_OPT

If you need to know if an option was set because of presetting actions
(configuration file processing or environment variables), versus a command
line entry versus one of the SET/DISABLE macros, then use this macro.  It
will yield one of four values: @code{OPTST_INIT}, @code{OPTST_SET},
@code{OPTST_PRESET} or @code{OPTST_DEFINED}.  It is used thus:

@example
switch (STATE_OPT( NAME )) @{
    case OPTST_INIT:
        not-preset, set or on the command line.  (unless CLEAR-ed)

    case OPTST_SET:
        option set via the SET_OPT_NAME() macro.

    case OPTST_PRESET:
        option set via an configuration file or environment variable

    case OPTST_DEFINED:
        option set via a command line option.

    default:
        cannot happen :)
@}
@end example

@node USAGE
@subsection USAGE( exit-code ) - Usage invocation macro
@findex USAGE

This macro invokes the procedure registered to display
the usage text.  Normally, this will be @code{optionUsage} from the
AutoOpts library, but you may select another procedure by specifying
@code{usage = "proc_name"} program attribute.  This procedure must
take two arguments@:  first, a pointer to the option descriptor, and
second the exit code.  The macro supplies the option descriptor
automatically.  This routine is expected to call @code{exit(3)} with
the provided exit code.

The @code{optionUsage} routine also behaves differently depending
on the exit code:

@table @code
@item EXIT_SUCCESS (the value zero)
It is assumed that full usage help has been requested.  Consequently, more
information is provided than when displaying usage and exiting with a
non-zero exit code.  Output will be sent to @file{stdout} and the program will
exit with a zero status code.

@item EX_USAGE (64)
The abbreviated usage will be printed to @file{stdout} and the program will
exit with a zero status code.  ``EX_USAGE'' may or may not be 64.  If your
system provides ``/usr/include/sysexits.h'' that has a different value,
then that value will be used.

@item any other value
The abbreviated usage will be printed to stderr and the program will
exit with the provided status code.
@end table

@node VALUE_OPT_name
@subsection VALUE_OPT_name - Option Flag Value
@findex VALUE_OPT_name

This is a #define for the flag character used to
specify an option on the command line.  If @code{value} was not
specified for the option, then it is a unique number associated
with the option.  @code{option value} refers to this value,
@code{option argument} refers to the (optional) argument to the
option.

@example
switch (WHICH_OPT_OTHER_OPT) @{
case VALUE_OPT_NAME:
    this-option-was-really-opt-name;
case VALUE_OPT_OTHER_OPT:
    this-option-was-really-other-opt;
@}
@end example

@node VERSION
@subsection VERSION - Version and Full Version
@findex VERSION

If the @code{version} attribute is defined for the program,
then a stringified version will be #defined as PROGRAM_VERSION and
PROGRAM_FULL_VERSION.  PROGRAM_FULL_VERSION is used for printing
the program version in response to the version option.  The version
option is automatically supplied in response to this attribute, too.

You may access PROGRAM_VERSION via @code{programOptions.pzFullVersion}.

@node WHICH_IDX_name
@subsection WHICH_IDX_name - Which Equivalenced Index
@findex WHICH_IDX_name

This macro gets emitted only for equivalenced-to options.  It is used to
obtain the index for the one of the several equivalence class members
set the equivalenced-to option.

@example
switch (WHICH_IDX_OTHER_OPT) @{
case INDEX_OPT_NAME:
    this-option-was-really-opt-name;
case INDEX_OPT_OTHER_OPT:
    this-option-was-really-other-opt;
@}
@end example

@node WHICH_OPT_name
@subsection WHICH_OPT_name - Which Equivalenced Option
@findex WHICH_OPT_name

This macro gets emitted only for equivalenced-to options.  It is used to
obtain the value code for the one of the several equivalence class members
set the equivalenced-to option.

@example
switch (WHICH_OPT_OTHER_OPT) @{
case VALUE_OPT_NAME:
    this-option-was-really-opt-name;
case VALUE_OPT_OTHER_OPT:
    this-option-was-really-other-opt;
@}
@end example

@node teOptIndex
@subsection teOptIndex - Option Index and Enumeration
@findex teOptIndex

This enum defines the complete set of options, both
user specified and automatically provided.  This can be used,
for example, to distinguish which of the equivalenced options
was actually used.

@example
switch (pOptDesc->optActualIndex) @{
case INDEX_OPT_FIRST:
    stuff;
case INDEX_OPT_DIFFERENT:
    different-stuff;
default:
    unknown-things;
@}
@end example

@node OPTIONS_STRUCT_VERSION
@subsection OPTIONS_STRUCT_VERSION - active version

You will not actually need to reference this value, but you need to be
aware that it is there.  It is the first value in the option descriptor
that you pass to @code{optionProcess}.  It contains a magic number and
version information.  Normally, you should be able to work with a more
recent option library than the one you compiled with.  However, if the
library is changed incompatibly, then the library will detect the out of
date magic marker, explain the difficulty and exit.  You will then need
to rebuild and recompile your option definitions.  This has rarely been
necessary.

@ignore
END   == AUTOOPTS-API == DO NOT CHANGE THIS COMMENT or the surrounding 'ignore's
Extraction from autogen.texi
@end ignore
@node libopts procedures
@subsection libopts External Procedures

These are the routines that libopts users may call directly from their
code.  There are several other routines that can be called by code
generated by the libopts option templates, but they are not to be
called from any other user code.  The @file{options.h} header is
fairly clear about this, too.

@menu
* libopts-ao_string_tokenize:: ao_string_tokenize
* libopts-configFileLoad::    configFileLoad
* libopts-optionFileLoad::    optionFileLoad
* libopts-optionFindNextValue:: optionFindNextValue
* libopts-optionFindValue::   optionFindValue
* libopts-optionFree::        optionFree
* libopts-optionGetValue::    optionGetValue
* libopts-optionLoadLine::    optionLoadLine
* libopts-optionNextValue::   optionNextValue
* libopts-optionOnlyUsage::   optionOnlyUsage
* libopts-optionProcess::     optionProcess
* libopts-optionRestore::     optionRestore
* libopts-optionSaveFile::    optionSaveFile
* libopts-optionSaveState::   optionSaveState
* libopts-optionUnloadNested:: optionUnloadNested
* libopts-optionVersion::     optionVersion
* libopts-pathfind::          pathfind
* libopts-strequate::         strequate
* libopts-streqvcmp::         streqvcmp
* libopts-streqvmap::         streqvmap
* libopts-strneqvcmp::        strneqvcmp
* libopts-strtransform::      strtransform
@end menu

This subsection was automatically generated by AutoGen
using extracted information and the aginfo3.tpl template.

@node libopts-ao_string_tokenize
@subsubsection ao_string_tokenize
@findex ao_string_tokenize

tokenize an input string

@noindent
Usage:
@example
token_list_t* res = ao_string_tokenize( string );
@end example
@noindent
Where the arguments are:
@multitable @columnfractions .05 .15 .20 .55
@item @tab Name @tab Type @tab Description
@item @tab ----- @tab ----- @tab -------------
@item @tab string @tab @code{char const*}
@tab string to be tokenized
@item @tab returns @tab token_list_t*
@tab pointer to a structure that lists each token
@end multitable

This function will convert one input string into a list of strings.
The list of strings is derived by separating the input based on
white space separation.  However, if the input contains either single
or double quote characters, then the text after that character up to
a matching quote will become the string in the list.

The returned pointer should be deallocated with @code{free(3C)} when
are done using the data.  The data are placed in a single block of
allocated memory.  Do not deallocate individual token/strings.

The structure pointed to will contain at least these two fields:
@table @samp
@item tkn_ct
The number of tokens found in the input string.
@item tok_list
An array of @code{tkn_ct + 1} pointers to substring tokens, with
the last pointer set to NULL.
@end table

There are two types of quoted strings: single quoted (@code{'}) and
double quoted (@code{"}).  Singly quoted strings are fairly raw in that
escape characters (@code{\\}) are simply another character, except when
preceding the following characters:
@example
@code{\\}  double backslashes reduce to one
@code{'}   incorporates the single quote into the string
@code{\n}  suppresses both the backslash and newline character
@end example

Double quote strings are formed according to the rules of string
constants in ANSI-C programs.

NULL is returned and @code{errno} will be set to indicate the problem:
@itemize @bullet
@item
@code{EINVAL} - There was an unterminated quoted string.
@item
@code{ENOENT} - The input string was empty.
@item
@code{ENOMEM} - There is not enough memory.
@end itemize


@node libopts-configFileLoad
@subsubsection configFileLoad
@findex configFileLoad

parse a configuration file

@noindent
Usage:
@example
const tOptionValue* res = configFileLoad( pzFile );
@end example
@noindent
Where the arguments are:
@multitable @columnfractions .05 .15 .20 .55
@item @tab Name @tab Type @tab Description
@item @tab ----- @tab ----- @tab -------------
@item @tab pzFile @tab @code{char const*}
@tab the file to load
@item @tab returns @tab const tOptionValue*
@tab An allocated, compound value structure
@end multitable

This routine will load a named configuration file and parse the
text as a hierarchically valued option.  The option descriptor
created from an option definition file is not used via this interface.
The returned value is "named" with the input file name and is of
type "@code{OPARG_TYPE_HIERARCHY}".  It may be used in calls to
@code{optionGetValue()}, @code{optionNextValue()} and
@code{optionUnloadNested()}.

If the file cannot be loaded or processed, @code{NULL} is returned and
@var{errno} is set.  It may be set by a call to either @code{open(2)}
@code{mmap(2)} or other file system calls, or it may be:
@itemize @bullet
@item
@code{ENOENT} - the file was not found.
@item
@code{ENOMSG} - the file was empty.
@item
@code{EINVAL} - the file contents are invalid -- not properly formed.
@item
@code{ENOMEM} - not enough memory to allocate the needed structures.
@end itemize


@node libopts-optionFileLoad
@subsubsection optionFileLoad
@findex optionFileLoad

Load the locatable config files, in order

@noindent
Usage:
@example
int res = optionFileLoad( pOpts, pzProg );
@end example
@noindent
Where the arguments are:
@multitable @columnfractions .05 .15 .20 .55
@item @tab Name @tab Type @tab Description
@item @tab ----- @tab ----- @tab -------------
@item @tab pOpts @tab @code{tOptions*}
@tab program options descriptor

@item @tab pzProg @tab @code{char const*}
@tab program name
@item @tab returns @tab int
@tab 0 -> SUCCESS, -1 -> FAILURE
@end multitable

This function looks in all the specified directories for a configuration
file ("rc" file or "ini" file) and processes any found twice.  The first
time through, they are processed in reverse order (last file first).  At
that time, only "immediate action" configurables are processed.  For
example, if the last named file specifies not processing any more
configuration files, then no more configuration files will be processed.
Such an option in the @strong{first} named directory will have no effect.

Once the immediate action configurables have been handled, then the
directories are handled in normal, forward order.  In that way, later
config files can override the settings of earlier config files.

See the AutoOpts documentation for a thorough discussion of the
config file format.

Configuration files not found or not decipherable are simply ignored.

Returns the value, "-1" if the program options descriptor
is out of date or indecipherable.  Otherwise, the value "0" will
always be returned.


@node libopts-optionFindNextValue
@subsubsection optionFindNextValue
@findex optionFindNextValue

find a hierarcicaly valued option instance

@noindent
Usage:
@example
const tOptionValue* res = optionFindNextValue( pOptDesc, pPrevVal, name, value );
@end example
@noindent
Where the arguments are:
@multitable @columnfractions .05 .15 .20 .55
@item @tab Name @tab Type @tab Description
@item @tab ----- @tab ----- @tab -------------
@item @tab pOptDesc @tab @code{const tOptDesc*}
@tab an option with a nested arg type

@item @tab pPrevVal @tab @code{const tOptionValue*}
@tab the last entry

@item @tab name @tab @code{char const*}
@tab name of value to find

@item @tab value @tab @code{char const*}
@tab the matching value
@item @tab returns @tab const tOptionValue*
@tab a compound value structure
@end multitable

This routine will find the next entry in a nested value option or
configurable.  It will search through the list and return the next entry
that matches the criteria.

The returned result is NULL and errno is set:
@itemize @bullet
@item
@code{EINVAL} - the @code{pOptValue} does not point to a valid
hierarchical option value.
@item
@code{ENOENT} - no entry matched the given name.
@end itemize


@node libopts-optionFindValue
@subsubsection optionFindValue
@findex optionFindValue

find a hierarcicaly valued option instance

@noindent
Usage:
@example
const tOptionValue* res = optionFindValue( pOptDesc, name, value );
@end example
@noindent
Where the arguments are:
@multitable @columnfractions .05 .15 .20 .55
@item @tab Name @tab Type @tab Description
@item @tab ----- @tab ----- @tab -------------
@item @tab pOptDesc @tab @code{const tOptDesc*}
@tab an option with a nested arg type

@item @tab name @tab @code{char const*}
@tab name of value to find

@item @tab value @tab @code{char const*}
@tab the matching value
@item @tab returns @tab const tOptionValue*
@tab a compound value structure
@end multitable

This routine will find an entry in a nested value option or configurable.
It will search through the list and return a matching entry.

The returned result is NULL and errno is set:
@itemize @bullet
@item
@code{EINVAL} - the @code{pOptValue} does not point to a valid
hierarchical option value.
@item
@code{ENOENT} - no entry matched the given name.
@end itemize


@node libopts-optionFree
@subsubsection optionFree
@findex optionFree

free allocated option processing memory

@noindent
Usage:
@example
optionFree( pOpts );
@end example
@noindent
Where the arguments are:
@multitable @columnfractions .05 .15 .20 .55
@item @tab Name @tab Type @tab Description
@item @tab ----- @tab ----- @tab -------------
@item @tab pOpts @tab @code{tOptions*}
@tab program options descriptor
@end multitable

AutoOpts sometimes allocates memory and puts pointers to it in the
option state structures.  This routine deallocates all such memory.

As long as memory has not been corrupted,
this routine is always successful.


@node libopts-optionGetValue
@subsubsection optionGetValue
@findex optionGetValue

get a specific value from a hierarcical list

@noindent
Usage:
@example
const tOptionValue* res = optionGetValue( pOptValue, valueName );
@end example
@noindent
Where the arguments are:
@multitable @columnfractions .05 .15 .20 .55
@item @tab Name @tab Type @tab Description
@item @tab ----- @tab ----- @tab -------------
@item @tab pOptValue @tab @code{const tOptionValue*}
@tab a hierarchcal value

@item @tab valueName @tab @code{char const*}
@tab name of value to get
@item @tab returns @tab const tOptionValue*
@tab a compound value structure
@end multitable

This routine will find an entry in a nested value option or configurable.
If "valueName" is NULL, then the first entry is returned.  Otherwise,
the first entry with a name that exactly matches the argument will be
returned.  If there is no matching value, NULL is returned and errno is
set to ENOENT. If the provided option value is not a hierarchical value,
NULL is also returned and errno is set to EINVAL.

The returned result is NULL and errno is set:
@itemize @bullet
@item
@code{EINVAL} - the @code{pOptValue} does not point to a valid
hierarchical option value.
@item
@code{ENOENT} - no entry matched the given name.
@end itemize


@node libopts-optionLoadLine
@subsubsection optionLoadLine
@findex optionLoadLine

process a string for an option name and value

@noindent
Usage:
@example
optionLoadLine( pOpts, pzLine );
@end example
@noindent
Where the arguments are:
@multitable @columnfractions .05 .15 .20 .55
@item @tab Name @tab Type @tab Description
@item @tab ----- @tab ----- @tab -------------
@item @tab pOpts @tab @code{tOptions*}
@tab program options descriptor

@item @tab pzLine @tab @code{char const*}
@tab NUL-terminated text
@end multitable

This is a client program callable routine for setting options from, for
example, the contents of a file that they read in.  Only one option may
appear in the text.  It will be treated as a normal (non-preset) option.

When passed a pointer to the option struct and a string, it will find
the option named by the first token on the string and set the option
argument to the remainder of the string.  The caller must NUL terminate
the string.  Any embedded new lines will be included in the option
argument.  If the input looks like one or more quoted strings, then the
input will be "cooked".  The "cooking" is identical to the string
formation used in AutoGen definition files (@pxref{basic expression}),
except that you may not use backquotes.

Invalid options are silently ignored.  Invalid option arguments
will cause a warning to print, but the function should return.


@node libopts-optionNextValue
@subsubsection optionNextValue
@findex optionNextValue

get the next value from a hierarchical list

@noindent
Usage:
@example
const tOptionValue* res = optionNextValue( pOptValue, pOldValue );
@end example
@noindent
Where the arguments are:
@multitable @columnfractions .05 .15 .20 .55
@item @tab Name @tab Type @tab Description
@item @tab ----- @tab ----- @tab -------------
@item @tab pOptValue @tab @code{const tOptionValue*}
@tab a hierarchcal list value

@item @tab pOldValue @tab @code{const tOptionValue*}
@tab a value from this list
@item @tab returns @tab const tOptionValue*
@tab a compound value structure
@end multitable

This routine will return the next entry after the entry passed in.  At the
end of the list, NULL will be returned.  If the entry is not found on the
list, NULL will be returned and "@var{errno}" will be set to EINVAL.
The "@var{pOldValue}" must have been gotten from a prior call to this
routine or to "@code{opitonGetValue()}".

The returned result is NULL and errno is set:
@itemize @bullet
@item
@code{EINVAL} - the @code{pOptValue} does not point to a valid
hierarchical option value or @code{pOldValue} does not point to a
member of that option value.
@item
@code{ENOENT} - the supplied @code{pOldValue} pointed to the last entry.
@end itemize


@node libopts-optionOnlyUsage
@subsubsection optionOnlyUsage
@findex optionOnlyUsage

Print usage text for just the options

@noindent
Usage:
@example
optionOnlyUsage( pOpts, ex_code );
@end example
@noindent
Where the arguments are:
@multitable @columnfractions .05 .15 .20 .55
@item @tab Name @tab Type @tab Description
@item @tab ----- @tab ----- @tab -------------
@item @tab pOpts @tab @code{tOptions*}
@tab program options descriptor

@item @tab ex_code @tab @code{int}
@tab exit code for calling exit(3)
@end multitable

This routine will print only the usage for each option.
This function may be used when the emitted usage must incorporate
information not available to AutoOpts.


@node libopts-optionProcess
@subsubsection optionProcess
@findex optionProcess

this is the main option processing routine

@noindent
Usage:
@example
int res = optionProcess( pOpts, argc, argv );
@end example
@noindent
Where the arguments are:
@multitable @columnfractions .05 .15 .20 .55
@item @tab Name @tab Type @tab Description
@item @tab ----- @tab ----- @tab -------------
@item @tab pOpts @tab @code{tOptions*}
@tab program options descriptor

@item @tab argc @tab @code{int}
@tab program arg count

@item @tab argv @tab @code{char**}
@tab program arg vector
@item @tab returns @tab int
@tab the count of the arguments processed
@end multitable

This is the main entry point for processing options.  It is intended
that this procedure be called once at the beginning of the execution of
a program.  Depending on options selected earlier, it is sometimes
necessary to stop and restart option processing, or to select completely
different sets of options.  This can be done easily, but you generally
do not want to do this.

The number of arguments processed always includes the program name.
If one of the arguments is "--", then it is counted and the processing
stops.  If an error was encountered and errors are to be tolerated, then
the returned value is the index of the argument causing the error.
A hyphen by itself ("-") will also cause processing to stop and will
@emph{not} be counted among the processed arguments.  A hyphen by itself
is treated as an operand.  Encountering an operand stops option
processing.

Errors will cause diagnostics to be printed.  @code{exit(3)} may
or may not be called.  It depends upon whether or not the options
were generated with the "allow-errors" attribute, or if the
ERRSKIP_OPTERR or ERRSTOP_OPTERR macros were invoked.


@node libopts-optionRestore
@subsubsection optionRestore
@findex optionRestore

restore option state from memory copy

@noindent
Usage:
@example
optionRestore( pOpts );
@end example
@noindent
Where the arguments are:
@multitable @columnfractions .05 .15 .20 .55
@item @tab Name @tab Type @tab Description
@item @tab ----- @tab ----- @tab -------------
@item @tab pOpts @tab @code{tOptions*}
@tab program options descriptor
@end multitable

Copy back the option state from saved memory.
The allocated memory is left intact, so this routine can be
called repeatedly without having to call optionSaveState again.
If you are restoring a state that was saved before the first call
to optionProcess(3AO), then you may change the contents of the
argc/argv parameters to optionProcess.

If you have not called @code{optionSaveState} before, a diagnostic is
printed to @code{stderr} and exit is called.


@node libopts-optionSaveFile
@subsubsection optionSaveFile
@findex optionSaveFile

saves the option state to a file

@noindent
Usage:
@example
optionSaveFile( pOpts );
@end example
@noindent
Where the arguments are:
@multitable @columnfractions .05 .15 .20 .55
@item @tab Name @tab Type @tab Description
@item @tab ----- @tab ----- @tab -------------
@item @tab pOpts @tab @code{tOptions*}
@tab program options descriptor
@end multitable

This routine will save the state of option processing to a file.  The name
of that file can be specified with the argument to the @code{--save-opts}
option, or by appending the @code{rcfile} attribute to the last
@code{homerc} attribute.  If no @code{rcfile} attribute was specified, it
will default to @code{.@i{programname}rc}.  If you wish to specify another
file, you should invoke the @code{SET_OPT_SAVE_OPTS(@i{filename})} macro.

The recommend usage is as follows:
@example
optionProcess(&progOptions, argc, argv);
if (i_want_a_non_standard_place_for_this)
SET_OPT_SAVE_OPTS("myfilename");
optionSaveFile(&progOptions);
@end example

If no @code{homerc} file was specified, this routine will silently return
and do nothing.  If the output file cannot be created or updated, a message
will be printed to @code{stderr} and the routine will return.


@node libopts-optionSaveState
@subsubsection optionSaveState
@findex optionSaveState

saves the option state to memory

@noindent
Usage:
@example
optionSaveState( pOpts );
@end example
@noindent
Where the arguments are:
@multitable @columnfractions .05 .15 .20 .55
@item @tab Name @tab Type @tab Description
@item @tab ----- @tab ----- @tab -------------
@item @tab pOpts @tab @code{tOptions*}
@tab program options descriptor
@end multitable

This routine will allocate enough memory to save the current option
processing state.  If this routine has been called before, that memory
will be reused.  You may only save one copy of the option state.  This
routine may be called before optionProcess(3AO).  If you do call it
before the first call to optionProcess, then you may also change the
contents of argc/argv after you call optionRestore(3AO)

In fact, more strongly put: it is safest to only use this function
before having processed any options.  In particular, the saving and
restoring of stacked string arguments and hierarchical values is
disabled.  The values are not saved.

If it fails to allocate the memory,
it will print a message to stderr and exit.
Otherwise, it will always succeed.


@node libopts-optionUnloadNested
@subsubsection optionUnloadNested
@findex optionUnloadNested

Deallocate the memory for a nested value

@noindent
Usage:
@example
optionUnloadNested( pOptVal );
@end example
@noindent
Where the arguments are:
@multitable @columnfractions .05 .15 .20 .55
@item @tab Name @tab Type @tab Description
@item @tab ----- @tab ----- @tab -------------
@item @tab pOptVal @tab @code{tOptionValue const *}
@tab the hierarchical value
@end multitable

A nested value needs to be deallocated.  The pointer passed in should
have been gotten from a call to @code{configFileLoad()} (See
@pxref{libopts-configFileLoad}).


@node libopts-optionVersion
@subsubsection optionVersion
@findex optionVersion

return the compiled AutoOpts version number

@noindent
Usage:
@example
char const* res = optionVersion();
@end example
@noindent
Where the arguments are:
@multitable @columnfractions .05 .15 .20 .55
@item @tab Name @tab Type @tab Description
@item @tab ----- @tab ----- @tab -------------
@item @tab returns @tab char const*
@tab the version string in constant memory
@end multitable

Returns the full version string compiled into the library.
The returned string cannot be modified.


@node libopts-pathfind
@subsubsection pathfind
@findex pathfind

fild a file in a list of directories

@noindent
Usage:
@example
char* res = pathfind( path, file, mode );
@end example
@noindent
Where the arguments are:
@multitable @columnfractions .05 .15 .20 .55
@item @tab Name @tab Type @tab Description
@item @tab ----- @tab ----- @tab -------------
@item @tab path @tab @code{char const*}
@tab colon separated list of search directories

@item @tab file @tab @code{char const*}
@tab the name of the file to look for

@item @tab mode @tab @code{char const*}
@tab the mode bits that must be set to match
@item @tab returns @tab char*
@tab the path to the located file
@end multitable

pathfind looks for a a file with name "FILE" and "MODE" access
along colon delimited "PATH", and returns the full pathname as a
string, or NULL if not found.  If "FILE" contains a slash, then
it is treated as a relative or absolute path and "PATH" is ignored.

@strong{NOTE}: this function is compiled into @file{libopts} only if
it is not natively supplied.

The "MODE" argument is a string of option letters chosen from the
list below:
@example
Letter    Meaning
r         readable
w         writable
x         executable
f         normal file       (NOT IMPLEMENTED)
b         block special     (NOT IMPLEMENTED)
c         character special (NOT IMPLEMENTED)
d         directory         (NOT IMPLEMENTED)
p         FIFO (pipe)       (NOT IMPLEMENTED)
u         set user ID bit   (NOT IMPLEMENTED)
g         set group ID bit  (NOT IMPLEMENTED)
k         sticky bit        (NOT IMPLEMENTED)
s         size nonzero      (NOT IMPLEMENTED)
@end example

returns NULL if the file is not found.


@node libopts-strequate
@subsubsection strequate
@findex strequate

map a list of characters to the same value

@noindent
Usage:
@example
strequate( ch_list );
@end example
@noindent
Where the arguments are:
@multitable @columnfractions .05 .15 .20 .55
@item @tab Name @tab Type @tab Description
@item @tab ----- @tab ----- @tab -------------
@item @tab ch_list @tab @code{char const*}
@tab characters to equivalence
@end multitable

Each character in the input string get mapped to the first character
in the string.
This function name is mapped to option_strequate so as to not conflict
with the POSIX name space.

none.


@node libopts-streqvcmp
@subsubsection streqvcmp
@findex streqvcmp

compare two strings with an equivalence mapping

@noindent
Usage:
@example
int res = streqvcmp( str1, str2 );
@end example
@noindent
Where the arguments are:
@multitable @columnfractions .05 .15 .20 .55
@item @tab Name @tab Type @tab Description
@item @tab ----- @tab ----- @tab -------------
@item @tab str1 @tab @code{char const*}
@tab first string

@item @tab str2 @tab @code{char const*}
@tab second string
@item @tab returns @tab int
@tab the difference between two differing characters
@end multitable

Using a character mapping, two strings are compared for "equivalence".
Each input character is mapped to a comparison character and the
mapped-to characters are compared for the two NUL terminated input strings.
This function name is mapped to option_streqvcmp so as to not conflict
with the POSIX name space.

none checked.  Caller responsible for seg faults.


@node libopts-streqvmap
@subsubsection streqvmap
@findex streqvmap

Set the character mappings for the streqv functions

@noindent
Usage:
@example
streqvmap( From, To, ct );
@end example
@noindent
Where the arguments are:
@multitable @columnfractions .05 .15 .20 .55
@item @tab Name @tab Type @tab Description
@item @tab ----- @tab ----- @tab -------------
@item @tab From @tab @code{char}
@tab Input character

@item @tab To @tab @code{char}
@tab Mapped-to character

@item @tab ct @tab @code{int}
@tab compare length
@end multitable

Set the character mapping.  If the count (@code{ct}) is set to zero, then
the map is cleared by setting all entries in the map to their index
value.  Otherwise, the "@code{From}" character is mapped to the "@code{To}"
character.  If @code{ct} is greater than 1, then @code{From} and @code{To}
are incremented and the process repeated until @code{ct} entries have been
set. For example,
@example
streqvmap('a', 'A', 26);
@end example
@noindent
will alter the mapping so that all English lower case letters
will map to upper case.

This function name is mapped to option_streqvmap so as to not conflict
with the POSIX name space.

none.


@node libopts-strneqvcmp
@subsubsection strneqvcmp
@findex strneqvcmp

compare two strings with an equivalence mapping

@noindent
Usage:
@example
int res = strneqvcmp( str1, str2, ct );
@end example
@noindent
Where the arguments are:
@multitable @columnfractions .05 .15 .20 .55
@item @tab Name @tab Type @tab Description
@item @tab ----- @tab ----- @tab -------------
@item @tab str1 @tab @code{char const*}
@tab first string

@item @tab str2 @tab @code{char const*}
@tab second string

@item @tab ct @tab @code{int}
@tab compare length
@item @tab returns @tab int
@tab the difference between two differing characters
@end multitable

Using a character mapping, two strings are compared for "equivalence".
Each input character is mapped to a comparison character and the
mapped-to characters are compared for the two NUL terminated input strings.
The comparison is limited to @code{ct} bytes.
This function name is mapped to option_strneqvcmp so as to not conflict
with the POSIX name space.

none checked.  Caller responsible for seg faults.


@node libopts-strtransform
@subsubsection strtransform
@findex strtransform

convert a string into its mapped-to value

@noindent
Usage:
@example
strtransform( dest, src );
@end example
@noindent
Where the arguments are:
@multitable @columnfractions .05 .15 .20 .55
@item @tab Name @tab Type @tab Description
@item @tab ----- @tab ----- @tab -------------
@item @tab dest @tab @code{char*}
@tab output string

@item @tab src @tab @code{char const*}
@tab input string
@end multitable

Each character in the input string is mapped and the mapped-to
character is put into the output.
This function name is mapped to option_strtransform so as to not conflict
with the POSIX name space.

The source and destination may be the same.

none.
@ignore
START == AUTOOPTS-DATA == DO NOT CHANGE THIS COMMENT or the surrounding 'ignore's
Extraction from autogen.texi
@end ignore

@c === SECTION MARKER

@node Multi-Threading
@section Multi-Threading

AutoOpts was designed to configure a program for running.  This generally
happens before much real work has been started.  Consequently, it is
expected to be run before multi-threaded applications have started multiple
threads.  However, this is not always the case. Some applications may
need to reset and reload their running configuration, and some may use
@code{SET_OPT_xxx()} macros during processing.  If you need to dynamically
change your option configuration in your multi-threaded application, it is
your responsibility to prevent all threads from accessing the option
configuration state, except the one altering the configuration.

The various accessor macros (@code{HAVE_OPT()}, etc.) do not modify state
and are safe to use in a multi-threaded application.  It is safe as long
as no other thread is concurrently modifying state, of course.

@c === SECTION MARKER

@node option descriptor
@section Option Descriptor File
@cindex option descriptor

This is the module that is to be compiled and linked with your program.
It contains internal data and procedures subject to change.  Basically,
it contains a single global data structure containing all the
information provided in the option definitions, plus a number of static
strings and any callout procedures that are specified or required.  You
should never have need for looking at this, except, perhaps, to examine
the code generated for implementing the @code{flag-code} construct.

@c === SECTION MARKER

@node Using AutoOpts
@section Using AutoOpts
@cindex using AutoOpts

There are actually several levels of ``using'' autoopts.
Which you choose depends upon how you plan to distribute
(or not) your application.

@menu
* local use::               local-only use
* binary not installed::    binary distro, AutoOpts not installed
* binary pre-installed::    binary distro, AutoOpts pre-installed
* source pre-installed::    source distro, AutoOpts pre-installed
* source not installed::    source distro, AutoOpts not installed
@end menu

@node local use
@subsection local-only use

To use AutoOpts in your application where you do not have to
worry about distribution issues, your issues are simple and few.

@itemize @bullet
@item
Create a file @samp{myopts.def}, according to the documentation above.
It is probably easiest to start with the example in @ref{Quick Start}
and edit it into the form you need.

@item
Run AutoGen to create the option interface file (@code{myopts.h})
and the option descriptor code (@code{myopts.c}):

@example
autogen myopts.def
@end example

@item
In all your source files where you need to refer to option state,
@code{#include "myopts.h"}.
@item
In your main routine, code something along the lines of:

@example
#define ARGC_MIN some-lower-limit
#define ARGC_MAX some-upper-limit
main( int argc, char** argv )
@{
    @{
        int arg_ct = optionProcess( &myprogOptions, argc, argv );
        argc -= arg_ct;
        if ((argc < ARGC_MIN) || (argc > ARGC_MAX)) @{
            fprintf( stderr, "%s ERROR:  remaining args (%d) "
                     "out of range\n", myprogOptions.pzProgName,
                     argc );

            USAGE( EXIT_FAILURE );
        @}
        argv += arg_ct;
    @}
    if (HAVE_OPT(OPTN_NAME))
        respond_to_optn_name();
    ...
@}
@end example

@item
Compile @samp{myopts.c} and link your program
with the following additional arguments:

@example
`autoopts-config cflags ldflags` myopts.c
@end example
@end itemize

@node binary not installed
@subsection binary distro, AutoOpts not installed

If you will be distributing (or copying) your project to a system that
does not have AutoOpts installed, you will need to statically link the
AutoOpts library, ``libopts'' into your program.  Get the link information
with ``@code{static-libs}'' instead of ``@code{ldflags}'':

@example
`autoopts-config static-libs`
@end example

@node binary pre-installed
@subsection binary distro, AutoOpts pre-installed

If you will be distributing (or copying) your project to a system that does
have AutoOpts (or only ``libopts'') installed, you will still need to ensure
that the library is findable at program load time, or you will still have to
statically link.  The former can be accomplished by linking your project with
@code{--rpath} or by setting the @code{LD_LIBRARY_PATH} appropriately.
Otherwise, @xref{binary not installed}.

@node source pre-installed
@subsection source distro, AutoOpts pre-installed

If you will be distributing your project to a system that will build
your product but it may not be pre-installed with AutoOpts, you will
need to do some configuration checking before you start the build.
Assuming you are willing to fail the build if AutoOpts has not been
installed, you will still need to do a little work.

AutoOpts is distributed with a configuration check M4 script,
@file{autoopts.m4}.  It will add an @code{autoconf} macro named,
@code{AG_PATH_AUTOOPTS}.  Add this to your @file{configure.ac} script
and use the following substitution values:

@table @code
@item AUTOGEN
the name of the autogen executable
@item AUTOGEN_TPLIB
the directory where AutoGen template library is stored
@item AUTOOPTS_CFLAGS
the compile time options needed to find the AutoOpts headers
@item AUTOOPTS_LIBS
the link options required to access the @code{libopts} library
@end table

@node source not installed
@subsection source distro, AutoOpts not installed

If you will be distributing your project to a system that will build
your product but it may not be pre-installed with AutoOpts, you may
wish to incorporate the sources for @code{libopts} in your project.
To do this, I recommend reading the tear-off libopts library
@file{README} that you can find in the @file{pkg/libopts} directory.
You can also examine an example package (blocksort) that incorporates
this tear off library in the autogen distribution directory.  There is
also a web page that describes what you need to do:
@example
@url{http://autogen.sourceforge.net/blocksort.html}
@end example

Alternatively, you can pull the @code{libopts} library sources into
a build directory and build it for installation along with your package.
This can be done approximately as follows:
@example
tar -xzvf `autoopts-config libsrc`
cd libopts-*
./bootstrap
configure
make
make install
@end example
That will install the library, but not the headers or anything else.

@c === SECTION MARKER

@node Presetting Options
@section Configuring your program
@cindex shell options

AutoOpts supports the notion of ``presetting'' the value or state of an option.
The values may be obtained either from environment variables or from
configuration files (@file{rc} or @file{ini} files).  In order to take
advantage of this, the AutoOpts client program must specify these features
in the option descriptor file (@pxref{program attributes}) with the
@code{rcfile} or @code{environrc} attributes.

@menu
* loading rcfile::      configuration file presets
* saving rcfile::       Saving the presets into a configuration file
* sample rcfile::       Creating a sample configuration file
* environrc::           environment variable presets
* config example::      Config file only example
@end menu

It is also possible to configure your program @i{without} using
the command line option parsing code.  This is done by using
only the following four functions from the @file{libopts} library:

@table @samp
@item configFileLoad
(@pxref{libopts-configFileLoad}) will parse the contents of a config
file and return a pointer to a structure representing the hierarchical
value.  The values are sorted alphabetically by the value name and all
entries with the same name will retain their original order.
Insertion sort is used.

@item optionGetValue
(@pxref{libopts-optionGetValue}) will find the first value within the
hierarchy with a name that matches the name passed in.

@item optionNextValue
(@pxref{libopts-optionNextValue}) will return the next value that
follows the value passed in as an argument.  If you wish to get all
the values for a particular name, you must take note when the name
changes.

@item optionUnloadNested
(@pxref{libopts-optionUnloadNested}).  The pointer passed in must be
of type, @code{OPARG_TYPE_HIERARCHY} (see the autoopts/options.h
header file).  @code{configFileLoad} will return a @code{tOptionValue}
pointer of that type.  This function will release all the associated
memory.  @code{AutoOpts} generated code uses this function for its own
needs.  Client code should only call this function with pointers
gotten from @code{configFileLoad}.
@end table

@node loading rcfile
@subsection configuration file presets
@cindex rcfile

Configuration files are enabled by specifying the program attribute
@code{homerc} (@pxref{program attributes}).  Any option not marked
with the ``no-preset'' attribute may appear in a configuration file.
The files loaded are selected both by the @code{homerc} entries and,
optionally, via a command line option.  The first component of the
@code{homerc} entry may be an environment variable such as @code{$HOME}, or
it may also be @code{$$} (@strong{two} dollar sign characters) to specify
the directory of the executable.  For example:

@example
homerc = "$$/../share/autogen";
@end example

@noindent
will cause the AutoOpts library to look in the normal autogen datadir
relative to the current installation directory for autogen.

The configuration files are processed in the order they are specified by
the @code{homerc} attribute, so that each new file will normally override
the settings of the previous files.  This may be overridden by marking some
options for @code{immediate action} (@pxref{Immediate Action}).  Any such
options are acted upon in @strong{reverse} order.  The disabled
@code{load-opts} (@code{--no-load-opts}) option, for example, is an
immediate action option.  Its presence in the last @code{homerc} file will
prevent the processing of any prior @code{homerc} files because its effect
is immediate.

Configuration file processing can be completely suppressed by specifying
@code{--no-load-opts} on the command line, or @code{PROGRAM_LOAD_OPTS=no} in
the environment (if @code{environrc} has been specified).

See the ``Configuration File Format'' section (@pxref{Config File Format})
for details on the format of the file.

@node saving rcfile
@subsection Saving the presets into a configuration file

When configuration files are enabled for an application, the user is
also provided with an automatically supplied @code{--save-opts} option.
All of the known option state will be written to either the specified
output file or, if it is not specified, then to the last specified
@code{homerc} file.

@node sample rcfile
@subsection Creating a sample configuration file
@cindex sample rcfile

AutoOpts is shipped with a template named, @file{rc-sample.tpl}.
If your option definition file specifies the @code{homerc} attribute,
then you may invoke @file{autogen} thus:

@example
autogen -Trc-sample <your-option-def-file>
@end example

This will, by default, produce a sample file named,
@file{sample-<prog-name>rc}.  It will be named differently if you specify your
configuration (rc) file name with the @code{rcfile} attribute.  In that case,
the output file will be named, @file{sample-<rcfile-name>}.  It will contain
all of the program options not marked as @code{no-preset}.  It will also
include the text from the @code{doc} attribute.

@ignore
END   == AUTOOPTS-DATA == DO NOT CHANGE THIS COMMENT or the surrounding 'ignore's
Extraction from autogen.texi
@end ignore
@noindent
Doing so with getdefs' option definitions yields this sample-getdefsrc file.
I tend to be wordy in my @code{doc} attributes:

@example
# getdefs sample configuration file
## This source file is copyrighted and licensed under the following terms:
#
#  Copyright (C) 1999-2012 Bruce Korb, all rights reserved.
#  This is free software. It is licensed for use, modification and
#  redistribution under the terms of the
#  GNU General Public License, version 3 or later
#      <http://gnu.org/licenses/gpl.html>
#
#  getdefs is free software: you can redistribute it and/or modify it
#  under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by the
#  Free Software Foundation, either version 3 of the License, or
#  (at your option) any later version.
#  
#  getdefs is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but
#  WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
#  MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.
#  See the GNU General Public License for more details.
#  
#  You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License along
#  with this program.  If not, see <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.

# defs_to_get -- Regexp to look for after the "/*="
#
# 
#
#
# If you want definitions only from a particular category, or even
# with names matching particular patterns, then specify this regular
# expression for the text that must follow the @@code@{/*=@}.
# Example:
#
#defs_to_get	reg-ex

# ordering -- Alphabetize or use named file
#
# 
#
#
# By default, ordering is alphabetical by the entry name.  Use,
# @@code@{no-ordering@} if order is unimportant.  Use @@code@{ordering@}
# with no argument to order without case sensitivity.  Use
# @@code@{ordering=<file-name>@} if chronological order is important.
# getdefs will maintain the text content of @@code@{file-name@}.
# @@code@{file-name@} need not exist.
# Example:
#
#ordering	file-name

# first_index -- The first index to apply to groups
#
# This configuration value takes an integer number as its argument.
#
#
# By default, the first occurrence of a named definition will have an
# index of zero.  Sometimes, that needs to be a reserved value.  Provide
# this option to specify a different starting point.
# Example:
#
#first_index	0

# input -- Input file to search for defs
#
# 
#
#
# All files that are to be searched for definitions must be named on
# the command line or read from @@code@{stdin@}.  If there is only one
# @@code@{input@} option and it is the string, "-", then the input file
# list is read from @@code@{stdin@}.  If a command line argument is not
# an option name and does not contain an assignment operator
# (@@code@{=@}), then it defaults to being an input file name.
# At least one input file must be specified.
# Example:
#
#input	src-file

# subblock -- subblock definition names
#
# 
#
#
# This option is used to create shorthand entries for nested definitions.
# For example, with:
# @@table @@r
# @@item using subblock thus
# @@code@{--subblock=arg=argname,type,null@}
# @@item and defining an @@code@{arg@} thus
# @@code@{arg: this, char *@}
# @@item will then expand to:
# @@code@{arg = @@@{ argname = this; type = "char *"; @@@};@}
# @@end table
# The "this, char *" string is separated at the commas, with the
# white space removed.  You may use characters other than commas by
# starting the value string with a punctuation character other than
# a single or double quote character.  You may also omit intermediate
# values by placing the commas next to each other with no intervening
# white space.  For example, "+mumble++yes+" will expand to:
# @@*
# @@code@{arg = @@@{ argname = mumble; null = "yes"; @@@};@}.
# Example:
#
#subblock	sub-def

# listattr -- attribute with list of values
#
# 
#
#
# This option is used to create shorthand entries for definitions
# that generally appear several times.  That is, they tend to be
# a list of values.  For example, with:
# @@*
# @@code@{listattr=foo@} defined, the text:
# @@*
# @@code@{foo: this, is, a, multi-list@} will then expand to:
# @@*
# @@code@{foo = 'this', 'is', 'a', 'multi-list';@}
# @@*
# The texts are separated by the commas, with the
# white space removed.  You may use characters other than commas by
# starting the value string with a punctuation character other than
# a single or double quote character.
# Example:
#
#listattr	def

# filelist -- Insert source file names into defs
#
# 
#
#
# Inserts the name of each input file into the output definitions.
# If no argument is supplied, the format will be:
# @@example
# infile = '%s';
# @@end example
# If an argument is supplied, that string will be used for the entry
# name instead of @@var@{infile@}.
# Example:
#
#filelist	file

# assign -- Global assignments
#
# 
#
#
# The argument to each copy of this option will be inserted into
# the output definitions, with only a semicolon attached.
# Example:
#
#assign	ag-def

# common_assign -- Assignments common to all blocks
#
# 
#
#
# The argument to each copy of this option will be inserted into
# each output definition, with only a semicolon attached.
# Example:
#
#common_assign	ag-def

# copy -- File(s) to copy into definitions
#
# 
#
#
# The content of each file named by these options will be inserted into
# the output definitions.
# Example:
#
#copy	file

# srcfile -- Insert source file name into each def
#
# 
#
#
# Inserts the name of the input file where a definition was found
# into the output definition.
# If no argument is supplied, the format will be:
# @@example
# srcfile = '%s';
# @@end example
# If an argument is supplied, that string will be used for the entry
# name instead of @@var@{srcfile@}.
# Example:
#
#srcfile	file

# linenum -- Insert source line number into each def
#
# 
#
#
# Inserts the line number in the input file where a definition
# was found into the output definition.
# If no argument is supplied, the format will be:
# @@example
# linenum = '%s';
# @@end example
# If an argument is supplied, that string will be used for the entry
# name instead of @@var@{linenum@}.
# Example:
#
#linenum	def-name

# output -- Output file to open
#
# 
#
#
# If you are not sending the output to an AutoGen process,
# you may name an output file instead.
# Example:
#
#output	file

# autogen -- Invoke AutoGen with defs
#
# 
#
#
# This is the default output mode.  Specifying @@code@{no-autogen@} is
# equivalent to @@code@{output=-@}.  If you supply an argument to this
# option, that program will be started as if it were AutoGen and
# its standard in will be set to the output definitions of this program.
# Example:
#
#autogen	ag-cmd

# template -- Template Name
#
# 
#
#
# Specifies the template name to be used for generating the final output.
# Example:
#
#template	file

# agarg -- AutoGen Argument
#
# 
#
#
# This is a pass-through argument.  It allows you to specify any
# arbitrary argument to be passed to AutoGen.
# Example:
#
#agarg	ag-opt

# base_name -- Base name for output file(s)
#
# 
#
#
# When output is going to AutoGen, a base name must either be supplied
# or derived.  If this option is not supplied, then it is taken from
# the @@code@{template@} option.  If that is not provided either, then
# it is set to the base name of the current directory.
# Example:
#
#base_name	name
@end example
@ignore
START == AO-DATA1 == DO NOT CHANGE THIS COMMENT or the surrounding 'ignore's
Extraction from autogen.texi
@end ignore

@node environrc
@subsection environment variable presets
@cindex environrc

If the AutoOpts client program specifies @code{environrc} in its
option descriptor file, then environment variables will be used for
presetting option state.  Variables will be looked for that are named,
@code{PROGRAM_OPTNAME} and @code{PROGRAM}.  @code{PROGRAM} is the
upper cased @code{C-name} of the program, and @code{OPTNAME} is the
upper cased @code{C-name} of a specific option.  (The @code{C-name}s
are the regular names with all special characters converted to
underscores (@code{_}).)

Option specific environment variables are processed after (and thus
take precedence over) the contents of the @code{PROGRAM} environment
variable.  The option argument string for these options takes on the
string value gotten from the environment.  Consequently, you can only
have one instance of the @code{OPTNAME}.

If a particular option may be disabled, then its disabled state is
indicated by setting the @code{PROGRAM_OPTNAME} value to the
disablement prefix.  So, for example, if the disablement prefix were
@code{dont}, then you can disable the @code{optname} option by setting
the @code{PROGRAM_OPTNAME}' environment variable to `@i{dont}'.
@xref{Common Attributes}.

The @code{PROGRAM} environment string is tokenized and parsed much
like a command line.  Doubly quoted strings have backslash escapes
processed the same way they are processed in C program constant
strings.  Singly quoted strings are ``pretty raw'' in that backslashes are
honored before other backslashes, apostrophes, newlines and cr/newline
pairs.  The options must be introduced with hyphens in the same way as
the command line.

Note that not all options may be preset.  Options that are specified with the
@code{no-preset} attribute and the @code{--help}, @code{--more-help},
and @code{--save-opts} auto-supported options may not be preset.

@node config example
@subsection Config file only example
@cindex rcfile
@cindex Configuration File
@cindex Configuration File example

If for some reason it is difficult or unworkable to integrate configuration
file processing with command line option parsing, the @code{libopts}
(@pxref{libopts procedures}) library can still be used to process configuration
files.  Below is a ``@t{Hello, World!}'' greeting program that tries
to load a configuration file @file{hello.conf} to see if it should use
an alternate greeting or to personalize the salutation.
@ignore
END   == AO-DATA1 == DO NOT CHANGE THIS COMMENT or the surrounding 'ignore's
Extraction from autogen.texi
@end ignore
@example
#include <config.h>
#include <sys/types.h>
#include <stdio.h>
#include <pwd.h>
#include <string.h>
#ifdef   HAVE_UNISTD_H
#include <unistd.h>
#endif
#include <autoopts/options.h>
int main(int argc, char ** argv) @{
  char const * greeting = "Hello";
  char const * greeted  = "World";
  tOptionValue const * pOV = configFileLoad("hello.conf");

  if (pOV != NULL) @{
    const tOptionValue* pGetV = optionGetValue(pOV, "greeting");

    if (  (pGetV != NULL)
       && (pGetV->valType == OPARG_TYPE_STRING))
      greeting = strdup(pGetV->v.strVal);

    pGetV = optionGetValue(pOV, "personalize");
    if (pGetV != NULL) @{
      struct passwd * pwe = getpwuid(getuid());
      if (pwe != NULL)
        greeted = strdup(pwe->pw_gecos);
    @}

    optionUnloadNested(pOV); /* deallocate config data */
  @}
  printf("%s, %s!\n", greeting, greeted);
  return 0;
@}
@end example

@noindent
With that text in a file named ``hello.c'', this short script:

@example
cc -o hello hello.c `autoopts-config cflags ldflags`
./hello
echo 'greeting Buzz off' > hello.conf
./hello
echo personalize > hello.conf
./hello
@end example

@noindent
will produce the following output:

@example
Hello, World!
Buzz off, World!
Hello, Bruce Korb!
@end example
@ignore
START == AO-DATA2 == DO NOT CHANGE THIS COMMENT or the surrounding 'ignore's
Extraction from autogen.texi
@end ignore

@c === SECTION MARKER

@node Config File Format
@section Configuration File Format
@cindex Configuration File

The configuration file is designed to associate names and values, much like
an AutoGen Definition File (@pxref{Definitions File}).  Unfortunately, the
file formats are different.  Specifically, AutoGen Definitions provide for
simpler methods for the precise control of a value string and provides for
dynamically computed content.  Configuration files have some established
traditions in their layout.  So, they are different, even though they do
both allow for a single name to be associated with multiple values and they
both allow for hierarchical values.

@menu
* config name/string-value::    assigning a string value to a configurable
* config integer-values::       integer values
* config nested-values::        hierarchical values
* config directives::           configuration file directives
* config comments::             comments in the configuration file
@end menu

@node config name/string-value
@subsection assigning a string value to a configurable

The basic syntax is a name followed by a value on a single line.  They are
separated from each other by either white space, a colon (@code{:}) or an
equal sign (@code{=}).  The colon or equal sign may optionally be surrounded
by additional white space.  If more than one value line is needed, a
backslash (@code{\}) may be used to continue the value.  The backslash (but
not the newline) will be erased.  Leading and trailing white space is always
stripped from the value.

Fundamentally, it looks like this:

@example
name  value for that name
name = another \
     multi-line value \
     for that name.
name: a *third* value for ``name''
@end example

If you need more control over the content of the value, you may enclose the
value in XML style brackets:
@example
<name>value </name>
@end example
@noindent
Within these brackets you need not (must not) continue the value data with
backslashes.  You may also select the string formation rules to use, just
add the attribute after the name, thus: @code{<name keep>}.

@table @samp
@item keep
This mode will keep all text between the brackets and not strip any
white space.
@item uncooked
This mode strips leading and trailing white space, but not do any
quote processing.  This is the default and need not be specified.
@item cooked
The text is trimmed of leading and trailing white space and XML encodings
are processed.  These encodings are slightly expanded over the XML
specification.  They are specified with an ampersand followed by a value
name or numeric value and then a semicolon:

@table @samp
@item  amp
@itemx lt
@itemx gt
@itemx quot
@itemx apos
@itemx #dd
@itemx #xHH

These are all per fairly standad HTML and/or XML encodings.
Additionally:

@item bs
The ASCII back space character.
@item ff
The ASCII form feed character.
@item ht
The ASCII horizontal (normal) tab character.
@item cr
The ASCII carriage return character.
@item vt
The ASCII vertical tab character.
@item bel
The ASCII alarm bell character.
@item nl
The ASCII new line character.
@item space
The ASCII space character.  Normally not necessary, but if you want
to preserve leading or trailing space characters, then use this.
@end table
@end table

And here is an example of an XML-styled value:

@example
<name cooked>
    This is&nl;&ht;another multi-line
&ht;string example.
</name>
@end example

The string value associated with ``name'' will be exactly the text enclosed
in quotes with the encoded characters ``cooked'' as you would expect
(three text lines with the last line not ending with a newline, but
ending with a period).

@node config integer-values
@subsection integer values

A name can be specified as having an integer value.  To do this, you
must use the XML-ish format and specify a ``type'' attribute for
the name:

@example
<name type=integer> 1234 </name>
@end example

Boolean, enumeration and set membership types will be added as time
allows.  ``type=string'' is also supported, but also is the default.

@node config nested-values
@subsection hierarchical values

In order to specify a hierarchical value, you *must* use XML-styled
formatting, specifying a type that is shorter and easier to spell:

@example
<structured-name type=nested>
    [[....]]
</structured-name>
@end example

@noindent
The ellipsis may be filled with any legal configuration file name/value
assignments.

@node config directives
@subsection configuration file directives
@cindex autoopts directives

The @code{<?} marker indicates an XML directive.
There is only one directive supported:  program sectioning,
though two syntaxes are supported.

If, for example, you have a collection of programs that work closely
together and, likely, have a common set of options, these programs may use a
single, sectioned, configuration file.  The file may be sectioned in either
of two ways.  The two ways may not be intermixed in a single configuration
file.  All text before the first segmentation line is processed, then only
the segment that applies:

@table @samp
@item <?auto-options ...>
The @code{...} ellipsis may contain AutoOpts option processing options.
Currently, that consists of one or both of:

@table @code
@item gnu
@itemx autoopts
to indicate GNU-standard or AutoOpts-standard layout of usage and
version information, and/or

@item misuse-usage
@itemx no-misuse-usage
to indicate whether the available options should be listed when
an invalid option appears on the command line.
@end table
@noindent
Anything else will be silently ignored.

@item <?program prog-name>
The @code{<?} marker indicates an XML directive.
The file is partitioned by these lines and the options are processed
for the @code{prog-name} program only before the first @code{<?program}
directive and the program section with a matching program name.

@item [PROG_NAME]
This is basically an alias for @code{<?program prog-name>}, except that
the program name must be upper cased and segmented only with underscores.
@end table

@noindent
Segmentation does not apply if the config file is being parsed with
the @code{configFileLoad(3AutoOpts)} function.

@node config comments
@subsection comments in the configuration file

Comments are lines beginning with a hash mark (@code{#}),
XML-style comments (@code{<!-- arbitrary text -->}), and
unrecognized XML directives.

@example
# this is a comment
<!-- this is also
     a comment -->
<?this is
  a bad comment ;->
@end example

@c === SECTION MARKER

@node shell options
@section AutoOpts for Shell Scripts
@cindex shell options
@cindex configuration file

AutoOpts may be used with shell scripts either by automatically creating a
complete program that will process command line options and pass back
the results to the invoking shell by issuing shell variable assignment
commands, or it may be used to generate portable shell code that can
be inserted into your script.

The functionality of these features, of course, is somewhat constrained
compared with the normal program facilities.  Specifically, you cannot
invoke callout procedures with either of these methods.  Additionally,
if you generate a shell script to do the parsing:

@enumerate
@item
You cannot obtain options from configuration files.
@item
You cannot obtain options from environment variables.
@item
You cannot save the option state to an option file.
@item
Option conflict/requirement verification is disabled.
@end enumerate

Both of these methods are enabled by running AutoGen on
the definitions file with the additional main procedure attribute:

@example
main = @{ main-type = shell-process; @};
@end example
@noindent
or:
@example
main = @{ main-type = shell-parser; @};
@end example

If you do not supply a @code{proc-to-call}, it will default to
@code{optionPutShell}.  That will produce a program that will process the
options and generate shell text for the invoking shell to interpret
(@pxref{binary-parser}).  If you supply the name, @code{optionParseShell}, then
you will have a program that will generate a shell script that can parse the
options (@pxref{script-parser}).  If you supply a different procedure name,
you will have to provide that routine and it may do whatever you like.

@menu
* binary-parser::        Parsing with an Executable
* script-parser::        Parsing with a Portable Script
@end menu

@node binary-parser
@subsection Parsing with an Executable

The following commands are approximately all that is needed
to build a shell script command line option parser from
an option definition file:

@example
autogen -L <opt-template-dir> test-errors.def
cc -o test-errors -L <opt-lib-dir> -I <opt-include-dir> \
        -DTEST_PROGRAM_OPTS test-errors.c -lopts
@end example

The resulting program can then be used within your shell script as follows:

@example
eval `./test-errors "$@@"`
if [ -z "$@{OPTION_CT@}" ] ; then exit 1 ; fi
test $@{OPTION_CT@} -gt 0 && shift $@{OPTION_CT@}
@end example
@ignore
END   == AO-DATA2 == DO NOT CHANGE THIS COMMENT or the surrounding 'ignore's
Extraction from autogen.texi
@end ignore

Here is the usage output example from AutoOpts error handling
tests.  The option definition has argument reordering enabled:

@example
test_errors - Test AutoOpts for errors
USAGE:  errors [ -<flag> [<val>] | --<name>[@{=| @}<val>] ]... arg ...
  Flg Arg Option-Name    Description
   -o no  option         The option option descrip
   -s Str second         The second option descrip
                                - may appear up to 10 times
   -i --- ignored        we have dumped this
   -X no  another        Another option descrip
                                - may appear up to 5 times
   -? no  help           Display extended usage information and exit
   -! no  more-help      Extended usage information passed thru pager
   -> opt save-opts      Save the option state to a config file
   -< Str load-opts      Load options from a config file
                                - disabled as --no-load-opts
                                - may appear multiple times

Options are specified by doubled hyphens and their name or by a single
hyphen and the flag character.
Operands and options may be intermixed.  They will be reordered.

The following option preset mechanisms are supported:
 - reading file errorsRC
Packaged by Bruce (2012-02-26)
Report test_errors bugs to bkorb@@gnu.org
@end example

Using the invocation,
@example
  test-errors operand1 -s first operand2 -X -- -s operand3
@end example
you get the following output for your shell script to evaluate:

@example
OPTION_CT=4
export OPTION_CT
TEST_ERRORS_SECOND='first'
export TEST_ERRORS_SECOND
TEST_ERRORS_ANOTHER=1 # 0x1
export TEST_ERRORS_ANOTHER
set -- 'operand1' 'operand2' '-s' 'operand3'
OPTION_CT=0
@end example
@node script-parser
@subsection Parsing with a Portable Script

If you had used @code{test-main = optionParseShell} instead, then you can,
at this point, merely run the program and it will write the parsing
script to standard out.  You may also provide this program with command
line options to specify the shell script file to create or edit, and you
may specify the shell program to use on the first shell script line.
That program's usage text would look something like the following
and the script parser itself would be very verbose:

@example
genshellopt - Generate Shell Option Processing Script - Ver. 1
USAGE:  genshellopt [ -<flag> [<val>] | --<name>[@{=| @}<val>] ]...
  Flg Arg Option-Name    Description
   -o Str script         Output Script File
   -s Str shell          Shell name (follows "#!" magic)
                                - disabled as --no-shell
                                - enabled by default
   -v opt version        Output version information and exit
   -? no  help           Display extended usage information and exit
   -! no  more-help      Extended usage information passed thru pager

Options are specified by doubled hyphens and their name or by a single
hyphen and the flag character.

Note that ``shell'' is only useful if the output file does not already
exist.  If it does, then the shell name and optional first argument will
be extracted from the script file.

If the script file already exists and contains Automated Option Processing
text, the second line of the file through the ending tag will be replaced
by the newly generated text.  The first ``#!''  line will be regenerated.
Packaged by Bruce (2012-02-26)
Report genshellopt bugs to bkorb@@gnu.org

= = = = = = = =

This incarnation of genshell will produce
a shell script to parse the options for getdefs:

getdefs (GNU AutoGen) - AutoGen Definition Extraction Tool - Ver. 1.5
USAGE:  getdefs [ <option-name>[@{=| @}<val>] ]...
   Arg Option-Name    Description
   Str defs-to-get    Regexp to look for after the "/*="
   opt ordering       Alphabetize or use named file
   Num first-index    The first index to apply to groups
   Str input          Input file to search for defs
   Str subblock       subblock definition names
   Str listattr       attribute with list of values
   opt filelist       Insert source file names into defs
   Str assign         Global assignments
   Str common-assign  Assignments common to all blocks
   Str copy           File(s) to copy into definitions
   opt srcfile        Insert source file name into each def
   opt linenum        Insert source line number into each def
   Str output         Output file to open
   opt autogen        Invoke AutoGen with defs
   Str template       Template Name
   Str agarg          AutoGen Argument
   Str base-name      Base name for output file(s)
   opt version        Output version information and exit
   no  help           Display extended usage information and exit
   no  more-help      Extended usage information passed thru pager
   opt save-opts      Save the option state to a config file
   Str load-opts      Load options from a config file

All arguments are named options.

If no ``input'' argument is provided or is set to simply "-", and if
``stdin'' is not a ``tty'', then the list of input files will be read from
``stdin''.
Packaged by Bruce (2012-02-26)
Report getdefs bugs to bkorb@@gnu.org
@end example

@noindent
Resulting in the following script:
@example
#! /bin/sh
# # # # # # # # # # -- do not modify this marker --
#
#  DO NOT EDIT THIS SECTION
 OF /old-home/bkorb/ag/ag/doc/ag-texi-13591.d/.ag-YGHDDo/genshellopt.sh
#
#  From here to the next `-- do not modify this marker --',
#  the text has been generated Sunday February 26, 2012 at 11:10:11 AM PST
#  From the GETDEFS option definitions
#
GETDEFS_LONGUSAGE_TEXT='getdefs (GNU AutoGen) - AutoGen Definition Extraction Tool - Ver. 1.5
USAGE:  getdefs [ <option-name>[@{=| @}<val>] ]...
   Arg Option-Name    Description
   Str defs-to-get    Regexp to look for after the "/*="
   opt ordering       Alphabetize or use named file
                                - disabled as --no-ordering
                                - enabled by default
   Num first-index    The first index to apply to groups
   Str input          Input file to search for defs
                                - may appear multiple times
                                - default option for unnamed options
   Str subblock       subblock definition names
                                - may appear multiple times
   Str listattr       attribute with list of values
                                - may appear multiple times
   opt filelist       Insert source file names into defs

Definition insertion options

   Arg Option-Name    Description
   Str assign         Global assignments
                                - may appear multiple times
   Str common-assign  Assignments common to all blocks
                                - may appear multiple times
   Str copy           File(s) to copy into definitions
                                - may appear multiple times
   opt srcfile        Insert source file name into each def
   opt linenum        Insert source line number into each def

Definition output disposition options:

   Arg Option-Name    Description
   Str output         Output file to open
                                - an alternate for autogen
   opt autogen        Invoke AutoGen with defs
                                - disabled as --no-autogen
                                - enabled by default
   Str template       Template Name
   Str agarg          AutoGen Argument
                                - prohibits these options:
                                output
                                - may appear multiple times
   Str base-name      Base name for output file(s)
                                - prohibits these options:
                                output

version and help options:

   Arg Option-Name    Description
   opt version        Output version information and exit
   no  help           Display extended usage information and exit
   no  more-help      Extended usage information passed thru pager
   opt save-opts      Save the option state to a config file
   Str load-opts      Load options from a config file
                                - disabled as --no-load-opts
                                - may appear multiple times

All arguments are named options.

If no ``input'\'''\'' argument is provided or is set to simply "-", and if
``stdin'\'''\'' is not a ``tty'\'''\'', then the list of input files will be read from
``stdin'\'''\''.

The following option preset mechanisms are supported:
 - reading file /dev/null

This program extracts AutoGen definitions from a list of source files.
Definitions are delimited by ``/*=<entry-type> <entry-name>\n'\'''\'' and
``=*/\n'\'''\''.
Packaged by Bruce (2012-02-26)
Report getdefs bugs to bkorb@@gnu.org'

GETDEFS_USAGE_TEXT='getdefs (GNU AutoGen) - AutoGen Definition Extraction Tool - Ver. 1.5
USAGE:  getdefs [ <option-name>[@{=| @}<val>] ]...
   Arg Option-Name    Description
   Str defs-to-get    Regexp to look for after the "/*="
   opt ordering       Alphabetize or use named file
   Num first-index    The first index to apply to groups
   Str input          Input file to search for defs
   Str subblock       subblock definition names
   Str listattr       attribute with list of values
   opt filelist       Insert source file names into defs
   Str assign         Global assignments
   Str common-assign  Assignments common to all blocks
   Str copy           File(s) to copy into definitions
   opt srcfile        Insert source file name into each def
   opt linenum        Insert source line number into each def
   Str output         Output file to open
   opt autogen        Invoke AutoGen with defs
   Str template       Template Name
   Str agarg          AutoGen Argument
   Str base-name      Base name for output file(s)
   opt version        Output version information and exit
   no  help           Display extended usage information and exit
   no  more-help      Extended usage information passed thru pager
   opt save-opts      Save the option state to a config file
   Str load-opts      Load options from a config file

All arguments are named options.

If no ``input'\'''\'' argument is provided or is set to simply "-", and if
``stdin'\'''\'' is not a ``tty'\'''\'', then the list of input files will be read from
``stdin'\'''\''.
Packaged by Bruce (2012-02-26)
Report getdefs bugs to bkorb@@gnu.org'


GETDEFS_DEFS_TO_GET=$@{GETDEFS_DEFS_TO_GET@}
GETDEFS_DEFS_TO_GET_set=false
export GETDEFS_DEFS_TO_GET

GETDEFS_ORDERING=$@{GETDEFS_ORDERING@}
GETDEFS_ORDERING_set=false
export GETDEFS_ORDERING

GETDEFS_FIRST_INDEX=$@{GETDEFS_FIRST_INDEX-'0'@}
GETDEFS_FIRST_INDEX_set=false
export GETDEFS_FIRST_INDEX
if test -z "$@{GETDEFS_INPUT@}"
then
  GETDEFS_INPUT_CT=0
else
  GETDEFS_INPUT_CT=1
  GETDEFS_INPUT_1=$@{GETDEFS_INPUT@}
fi
export GETDEFS_INPUT_CT
if test -z "$@{GETDEFS_SUBBLOCK@}"
then
  GETDEFS_SUBBLOCK_CT=0
else
  GETDEFS_SUBBLOCK_CT=1
  GETDEFS_SUBBLOCK_1=$@{GETDEFS_SUBBLOCK@}
fi
export GETDEFS_SUBBLOCK_CT
if test -z "$@{GETDEFS_LISTATTR@}"
then
  GETDEFS_LISTATTR_CT=0
else
  GETDEFS_LISTATTR_CT=1
  GETDEFS_LISTATTR_1=$@{GETDEFS_LISTATTR@}
fi
export GETDEFS_LISTATTR_CT
GETDEFS_FILELIST=$@{GETDEFS_FILELIST@}
GETDEFS_FILELIST_set=false
export GETDEFS_FILELIST

if test -z "$@{GETDEFS_ASSIGN@}"
then
  GETDEFS_ASSIGN_CT=0
else
  GETDEFS_ASSIGN_CT=1
  GETDEFS_ASSIGN_1=$@{GETDEFS_ASSIGN@}
fi
export GETDEFS_ASSIGN_CT
if test -z "$@{GETDEFS_COMMON_ASSIGN@}"
then
  GETDEFS_COMMON_ASSIGN_CT=0
else
  GETDEFS_COMMON_ASSIGN_CT=1
  GETDEFS_COMMON_ASSIGN_1=$@{GETDEFS_COMMON_ASSIGN@}
fi
export GETDEFS_COMMON_ASSIGN_CT
if test -z "$@{GETDEFS_COPY@}"
then
  GETDEFS_COPY_CT=0
else
  GETDEFS_COPY_CT=1
  GETDEFS_COPY_1=$@{GETDEFS_COPY@}
fi
export GETDEFS_COPY_CT
GETDEFS_SRCFILE=$@{GETDEFS_SRCFILE@}
GETDEFS_SRCFILE_set=false
export GETDEFS_SRCFILE

GETDEFS_LINENUM=$@{GETDEFS_LINENUM@}
GETDEFS_LINENUM_set=false
export GETDEFS_LINENUM

GETDEFS_OUTPUT=$@{GETDEFS_OUTPUT@}
GETDEFS_OUTPUT_set=false
export GETDEFS_OUTPUT

GETDEFS_AUTOGEN=$@{GETDEFS_AUTOGEN@}
GETDEFS_AUTOGEN_set=false
export GETDEFS_AUTOGEN

GETDEFS_TEMPLATE=$@{GETDEFS_TEMPLATE@}
GETDEFS_TEMPLATE_set=false
export GETDEFS_TEMPLATE

if test -z "$@{GETDEFS_AGARG@}"
then
  GETDEFS_AGARG_CT=0
else
  GETDEFS_AGARG_CT=1
  GETDEFS_AGARG_1=$@{GETDEFS_AGARG@}
fi
export GETDEFS_AGARG_CT
GETDEFS_BASE_NAME=$@{GETDEFS_BASE_NAME@}
GETDEFS_BASE_NAME_set=false
export GETDEFS_BASE_NAME

OPT_ARG=$1
while [ $# -gt 0 ]
do
    OPT_ELEMENT=''
    OPT_ARG_VAL=''
    OPT_ARG=$@{1@}
        OPT_CODE=`echo "X$@{OPT_ARG@}"|sed 's/^X-*//'`
        shift
        OPT_ARG=$1
        case "$@{OPT_CODE@}" in *=* )
            OPT_ARG_VAL=`echo "$@{OPT_CODE@}"|sed 's/^[^=]*=//'`
            OPT_CODE=`echo "$@{OPT_CODE@}"|sed 's/=.*$//'` ;; esac
        case "$@{OPT_CODE@}" in
        'de' | \
        'def' | \
        'defs' | \
        'defs-' | \
        'defs-t' | \
        'defs-to' | \
        'defs-to-' | \
        'defs-to-g' | \
        'defs-to-ge' | \
        'defs-to-get' )
            if [ -n "$@{GETDEFS_DEFS_TO_GET@}" ] && $@{GETDEFS_DEFS_TO_GET_set@} ; then
                echo Error:  duplicate DEFS_TO_GET option >&2
                echo "$GETDEFS_USAGE_TEXT"
                exit 1 ; fi
            GETDEFS_DEFS_TO_GET_set=true
            OPT_NAME='DEFS_TO_GET'
            OPT_ARG_NEEDED=YES
            ;;

        'or' | \
        'ord' | \
        'orde' | \
        'order' | \
        'orderi' | \
        'orderin' | \
        'ordering' )
            if [ -n "$@{GETDEFS_ORDERING@}" ] && $@{GETDEFS_ORDERING_set@} ; then
                echo Error:  duplicate ORDERING option >&2
                echo "$GETDEFS_USAGE_TEXT"
                exit 1 ; fi
            GETDEFS_ORDERING_set=true
            OPT_NAME='ORDERING'
            eval GETDEFS_ORDERING$@{OPT_ELEMENT@}=true
            export GETDEFS_ORDERING$@{OPT_ELEMENT@}
            OPT_ARG_NEEDED=OK
            ;;

        'no-o' | \
        'no-or' | \
        'no-ord' | \
        'no-orde' | \
        'no-order' | \
        'no-orderi' | \
        'no-orderin' | \
        'no-ordering' )
            if [ -n "$@{GETDEFS_ORDERING@}" ] && $@{GETDEFS_ORDERING_set@} ; then
                echo 'Error:  duplicate ORDERING option' >&2
                echo "$GETDEFS_USAGE_TEXT"
                exit 1 ; fi
            GETDEFS_ORDERING_set=true
            GETDEFS_ORDERING='no'
            export GETDEFS_ORDERING
            OPT_NAME='ORDERING'
            OPT_ARG_NEEDED=NO
            ;;

        'fir' | \
        'firs' | \
        'first' | \
        'first-' | \
        'first-i' | \
        'first-in' | \
        'first-ind' | \
        'first-inde' | \
        'first-index' )
            if [ -n "$@{GETDEFS_FIRST_INDEX@}" ] && $@{GETDEFS_FIRST_INDEX_set@} ; then
                echo Error:  duplicate FIRST_INDEX option >&2
                echo "$GETDEFS_USAGE_TEXT"
                exit 1 ; fi
            GETDEFS_FIRST_INDEX_set=true
            OPT_NAME='FIRST_INDEX'
            OPT_ARG_NEEDED=YES
            ;;

        'in' | \
        'inp' | \
        'inpu' | \
        'input' )
            GETDEFS_INPUT_CT=`expr $@{GETDEFS_INPUT_CT@} + 1`
            OPT_ELEMENT="_$@{GETDEFS_INPUT_CT@}"
            OPT_NAME='INPUT'
            OPT_ARG_NEEDED=YES
            ;;

        'su' | \
        'sub' | \
        'subb' | \
        'subbl' | \
        'subblo' | \
        'subbloc' | \
        'subblock' )
            GETDEFS_SUBBLOCK_CT=`expr $@{GETDEFS_SUBBLOCK_CT@} + 1`
            OPT_ELEMENT="_$@{GETDEFS_SUBBLOCK_CT@}"
            OPT_NAME='SUBBLOCK'
            OPT_ARG_NEEDED=YES
            ;;

        'lis' | \
        'list' | \
        'lista' | \
        'listat' | \
        'listatt' | \
        'listattr' )
            GETDEFS_LISTATTR_CT=`expr $@{GETDEFS_LISTATTR_CT@} + 1`
            OPT_ELEMENT="_$@{GETDEFS_LISTATTR_CT@}"
            OPT_NAME='LISTATTR'
            OPT_ARG_NEEDED=YES
            ;;

        'fil' | \
        'file' | \
        'filel' | \
        'fileli' | \
        'filelis' | \
        'filelist' )
            if [ -n "$@{GETDEFS_FILELIST@}" ] && $@{GETDEFS_FILELIST_set@} ; then
                echo Error:  duplicate FILELIST option >&2
                echo "$GETDEFS_USAGE_TEXT"
                exit 1 ; fi
            GETDEFS_FILELIST_set=true
            OPT_NAME='FILELIST'
            eval GETDEFS_FILELIST$@{OPT_ELEMENT@}=true
            export GETDEFS_FILELIST$@{OPT_ELEMENT@}
            OPT_ARG_NEEDED=OK
            ;;

        'as' | \
        'ass' | \
        'assi' | \
        'assig' | \
        'assign' )
            GETDEFS_ASSIGN_CT=`expr $@{GETDEFS_ASSIGN_CT@} + 1`
            OPT_ELEMENT="_$@{GETDEFS_ASSIGN_CT@}"
            OPT_NAME='ASSIGN'
            OPT_ARG_NEEDED=YES
            ;;

        'com' | \
        'comm' | \
        'commo' | \
        'common' | \
        'common-' | \
        'common-a' | \
        'common-as' | \
        'common-ass' | \
        'common-assi' | \
        'common-assig' | \
        'common-assign' )
            GETDEFS_COMMON_ASSIGN_CT=`expr $@{GETDEFS_COMMON_ASSIGN_CT@} + 1`
            OPT_ELEMENT="_$@{GETDEFS_COMMON_ASSIGN_CT@}"
            OPT_NAME='COMMON_ASSIGN'
            OPT_ARG_NEEDED=YES
            ;;

        'cop' | \
        'copy' )
            GETDEFS_COPY_CT=`expr $@{GETDEFS_COPY_CT@} + 1`
            OPT_ELEMENT="_$@{GETDEFS_COPY_CT@}"
            OPT_NAME='COPY'
            OPT_ARG_NEEDED=YES
            ;;

        'sr' | \
        'src' | \
        'srcf' | \
        'srcfi' | \
        'srcfil' | \
        'srcfile' )
            if [ -n "$@{GETDEFS_SRCFILE@}" ] && $@{GETDEFS_SRCFILE_set@} ; then
                echo Error:  duplicate SRCFILE option >&2
                echo "$GETDEFS_USAGE_TEXT"
                exit 1 ; fi
            GETDEFS_SRCFILE_set=true
            OPT_NAME='SRCFILE'
            eval GETDEFS_SRCFILE$@{OPT_ELEMENT@}=true
            export GETDEFS_SRCFILE$@{OPT_ELEMENT@}
            OPT_ARG_NEEDED=OK
            ;;

        'lin' | \
        'line' | \
        'linen' | \
        'linenu' | \
        'linenum' )
            if [ -n "$@{GETDEFS_LINENUM@}" ] && $@{GETDEFS_LINENUM_set@} ; then
                echo Error:  duplicate LINENUM option >&2
                echo "$GETDEFS_USAGE_TEXT"
                exit 1 ; fi
            GETDEFS_LINENUM_set=true
            OPT_NAME='LINENUM'
            eval GETDEFS_LINENUM$@{OPT_ELEMENT@}=true
            export GETDEFS_LINENUM$@{OPT_ELEMENT@}
            OPT_ARG_NEEDED=OK
            ;;

        'ou' | \
        'out' | \
        'outp' | \
        'outpu' | \
        'output' )
            if [ -n "$@{GETDEFS_OUTPUT@}" ] && $@{GETDEFS_OUTPUT_set@} ; then
                echo Error:  duplicate OUTPUT option >&2
                echo "$GETDEFS_USAGE_TEXT"
                exit 1 ; fi
            GETDEFS_OUTPUT_set=true
            OPT_NAME='OUTPUT'
            OPT_ARG_NEEDED=YES
            ;;

        'au' | \
        'aut' | \
        'auto' | \
        'autog' | \
        'autoge' | \
        'autogen' )
            if [ -n "$@{GETDEFS_AUTOGEN@}" ] && $@{GETDEFS_AUTOGEN_set@} ; then
                echo Error:  duplicate AUTOGEN option >&2
                echo "$GETDEFS_USAGE_TEXT"
                exit 1 ; fi
            GETDEFS_AUTOGEN_set=true
            OPT_NAME='AUTOGEN'
            eval GETDEFS_AUTOGEN$@{OPT_ELEMENT@}=true
            export GETDEFS_AUTOGEN$@{OPT_ELEMENT@}
            OPT_ARG_NEEDED=OK
            ;;

        'no-a' | \
        'no-au' | \
        'no-aut' | \
        'no-auto' | \
        'no-autog' | \
        'no-autoge' | \
        'no-autogen' )
            if [ -n "$@{GETDEFS_AUTOGEN@}" ] && $@{GETDEFS_AUTOGEN_set@} ; then
                echo 'Error:  duplicate AUTOGEN option' >&2
                echo "$GETDEFS_USAGE_TEXT"
                exit 1 ; fi
            GETDEFS_AUTOGEN_set=true
            GETDEFS_AUTOGEN='no'
            export GETDEFS_AUTOGEN
            OPT_NAME='AUTOGEN'
            OPT_ARG_NEEDED=NO
            ;;

        'te' | \
        'tem' | \
        'temp' | \
        'templ' | \
        'templa' | \
        'templat' | \
        'template' )
            if [ -n "$@{GETDEFS_TEMPLATE@}" ] && $@{GETDEFS_TEMPLATE_set@} ; then
                echo Error:  duplicate TEMPLATE option >&2
                echo "$GETDEFS_USAGE_TEXT"
                exit 1 ; fi
            GETDEFS_TEMPLATE_set=true
            OPT_NAME='TEMPLATE'
            OPT_ARG_NEEDED=YES
            ;;

        'ag' | \
        'aga' | \
        'agar' | \
        'agarg' )
            GETDEFS_AGARG_CT=`expr $@{GETDEFS_AGARG_CT@} + 1`
            OPT_ELEMENT="_$@{GETDEFS_AGARG_CT@}"
            OPT_NAME='AGARG'
            OPT_ARG_NEEDED=YES
            ;;

        'ba' | \
        'bas' | \
        'base' | \
        'base-' | \
        'base-n' | \
        'base-na' | \
        'base-nam' | \
        'base-name' )
            if [ -n "$@{GETDEFS_BASE_NAME@}" ] && $@{GETDEFS_BASE_NAME_set@} ; then
                echo Error:  duplicate BASE_NAME option >&2
                echo "$GETDEFS_USAGE_TEXT"
                exit 1 ; fi
            GETDEFS_BASE_NAME_set=true
            OPT_NAME='BASE_NAME'
            OPT_ARG_NEEDED=YES
            ;;

        've' | \
        'ver' | \
        'vers' | \
        'versi' | \
        'versio' | \
        'version' )
            echo "$GETDEFS_LONGUSAGE_TEXT"
            exit 0
            ;;

        'he' | \
        'hel' | \
        'help' )
            echo "$GETDEFS_LONGUSAGE_TEXT"
            exit 0
            ;;

        'mo' | \
        'mor' | \
        'more' | \
        'more-' | \
        'more-h' | \
        'more-he' | \
        'more-hel' | \
        'more-help' )
            echo "$GETDEFS_LONGUSAGE_TEXT" | $@{PAGER-more@}
            exit 0
            ;;

        'sa' | \
        'sav' | \
        'save' | \
        'save-' | \
        'save-o' | \
        'save-op' | \
        'save-opt' | \
        'save-opts' )
            echo 'Warning:  Cannot save options files' >&2
            OPT_ARG_NEEDED=OK
            ;;

        'lo' | \
        'loa' | \
        'load' | \
        'load-' | \
        'load-o' | \
        'load-op' | \
        'load-opt' | \
        'load-opts' )
            echo 'Warning:  Cannot load options files' >&2
            OPT_ARG_NEEDED=YES
            ;;

        'no-l' | \
        'no-lo' | \
        'no-loa' | \
        'no-load' | \
        'no-load-' | \
        'no-load-o' | \
        'no-load-op' | \
        'no-load-opt' | \
        'no-load-opts' )
            echo 'Warning:  Cannot suppress the loading of options files' >&2
            OPT_ARG_NEEDED=NO
            ;;

        * )
            echo Unknown option: "$@{OPT_CODE@}" >&2
            echo "$GETDEFS_USAGE_TEXT"
            exit 1
            ;;
        esac

        case "$@{OPT_ARG_NEEDED@}" in
        NO )
            OPT_ARG_VAL=''
            ;;
        YES )
            if [ -z "$@{OPT_ARG_VAL@}" ]
            then
                if [ $# -eq 0 ]
                then
                    echo No argument provided for $@{OPT_NAME@} option >&2
                    echo "$GETDEFS_USAGE_TEXT"
                    exit 1
                fi
                OPT_ARG_VAL=$@{OPT_ARG@}
                shift
                OPT_ARG=$1
            fi
            ;;
        OK )
            if [ -z "$@{OPT_ARG_VAL@}" ] && [ $# -gt 0 ]
            then
                case "$@{OPT_ARG@}" in -* ) ;; * )
                    OPT_ARG_VAL=$@{OPT_ARG@}
                    shift
                    OPT_ARG=$1 ;; esac
            fi
            ;;
        esac
    if [ -n "$@{OPT_ARG_VAL@}" ]
    then
        eval GETDEFS_$@{OPT_NAME@}$@{OPT_ELEMENT@}="'$@{OPT_ARG_VAL@}'"
        export GETDEFS_$@{OPT_NAME@}$@{OPT_ELEMENT@}
    fi
done
unset OPT_PROCESS || :
unset OPT_ELEMENT || :
unset OPT_ARG     || :
unset OPT_ARG_NEEDED || :
unset OPT_NAME    || :
unset OPT_CODE    || :
unset OPT_ARG_VAL || :

# # # # # # # # # #
#
#  END OF AUTOMATED OPTION PROCESSING
#
# # # # # # # # # # -- do not modify this marker --

env | grep '^GETDEFS_'
@end example
@ignore
START == AUTOINFO == DO NOT CHANGE THIS COMMENT or the surrounding 'ignore's
Extraction from autogen.texi
@end ignore

@c === SECTION MARKER

@node AutoInfo
@section Automated Info Docs
@cindex AutoInfo

AutoOpts provides two templates for producing @file{.texi} documentation.
@file{agtexi-cmd.tpl} for the invoking section, and @file{aginfo3.tpl} for
describing exported library functions and macros.

For both types of documents, the documentation level is selected by
passing a @samp{-DLEVEL=<level-name>} argument to AutoGen when you build
the document.  (See the example invocation below.)

Two files will be produced, a @file{.texi} file and a @file{.menu} file.
You should include the text in the @file{.menu} file in a @file{@@menu}
list, either with @file{@@include}-ing it or just copying text.
The @file{.texi} file should be @file{@@include}-ed where the invoking
section belongs in your document.

The @file{.texi} file will contain an introductory paragraph, a menu
and a subordinate section for the invocation usage and for each
documented option.  The introductory paragraph is normally the boiler
plate text, along the lines of:

@example
This chapter documents the @@file@{AutoOpts@} generated usage text
and option meanings for the @@file@{your-program@} program.
@end example

@noindent
or:

@example
These are the publicly exported procedures from the lib@i{name} library.
Any other functions mentioned in the @i{header} file are for the private use
of the library.
@end example

@menu
* command-info::      ``invoking'' info docs
* library-info::      library info docs
@end menu

@node command-info
@subsection ``invoking'' info docs

Using the option definitions for an AutoOpt client program, the
@file{agtexi-cmd.tpl} template will produce texinfo text that documents the
invocation of your program.  The text emitted is designed to be included
in the full texinfo document for your product.  It is not a stand-alone
document.  The usage text for the @ref{autogen usage},
@ref{getdefs usage} and @ref{columns usage} programs, are included in
this document and are all generated using this template.

If your program's option definitions include a
@samp{prog-info-descrip} section, then that text will replace the
boilerplate introductory paragraph.

@noindent
These files are produced by invoking the following command:

@example
autogen -L $@{prefix@}/share/autogen -Tagtexi-cmd.tpl \
        -DLEVEL=section your-opts.def
@end example

@noindent
Where @file{$@{prefix@}} is the AutoGen installation prefix
and @file{your-opts.def} is the name of your product's option
definition file.

@node library-info
@subsection library info docs

The @file{texinfo} doc for libraries is derived from mostly the same
information as is used for producing man pages @xref{man3}.  The main
difference is that there is only one output file and the individual
functions are referenced from a @code{.texi} menu.  There is also
a small difference in the global attributes used:

@multitable @columnfractions .02 .23 .65
@item @tab lib_description
@tab A description of the library.  This text appears before the menu.
If not provided, the standard boilerplate version will be inserted.
@item
@item @tab see_also
@tab The @code{SEE ALSO} functionality is not supported for the
@file{texinfo} documentation, so any @code{see_also} attribute will be ignored.
@end multitable

@noindent
These files are produced by invoking the following commands:

@example
getdefs linenum srcfile template=aginfo3.tpl output=libexport.def \
       <source-file-list>

autogen -L $@{prefix@}/share/autogen -DLEVEL=section libexport.def
@end example

@noindent
Where @file{$@{prefix@}} is the AutoGen installation prefix
and @file{libexport.def} is some name that suits you.

An example of this can be seen in this document, @xref{libopts procedures}.

@c === SECTION MARKER

@node AutoMan pages
@section Automated Man Pages
@cindex AutoMan pages

AutoOpts provides two templates for producing man pages.
The command (@file{man1}) pages are derived from the options definition
file, and the library (@file{man3}) pages are derived from
stylized comments (@pxref{getdefs Invocation}).

@menu
* man1::      command line man pages
* man3::      library man pages
@end menu

@node man1
@subsection command line man pages

Using the option definitions for an AutoOpts client program,
the @samp{agman-cmd.tpl} template will produce an nroff document
suitable for use as a @samp{man(1)} page document for a command
line command.  The description section of the document is either
the @samp{prog-man-descrip} text, if present, or the @samp{detail}
text.

Each option in the option definitions file is fully documented
in its usage.  This includes all the information documented
above for each option (@pxref{option attributes}), plus
the @samp{doc} attribute is appended.  Since the @samp{doc}
text is presumed to be designed for @code{texinfo} documentation,
@code{sed} is used to convert some constructs from @code{texi}
to @code{nroff}-for-@code{man}-pages.  Specifically,

@example
convert @@code, @@var and @@samp into \fB...\fP phrases
convert @@file into \fI...\fP phrases
Remove the '@@' prefix from curly braces
Indent example regions
Delete the example commands
Replace @samp{end example} command with ".br"
Replace the @samp{@@*} command with ".br"
@end example

@noindent
This document is produced by invoking the following command:

@example
autogen -L $@{prefix@}/share/autogen -Tagman-cmd.tpl options.def
@end example

@noindent
Where @file{$@{prefix@}} is the AutoGen installation prefix and
@file{options.def} is the name of your product's option definition file.
I do not use this very much, so any feedback or improvements would be
greatly appreciated.

@node man3
@subsection library man pages

Two global definitions are required, and then
one library man page is produced for each @code{export_func} definition
that is found.  It is generally convenient to place these definitions
as @file{getdefs} comments (@pxref{getdefs Invocation}) near the procedure
definition, but they may also be a separate AutoGen definitions file
(@pxref{Definitions File}).  Each function will be cross referenced
with their sister functions in a @file{SEE ALSO} section.  A global
@code{see_also} definition will be appended to this cross referencing text.

@noindent
The two global definitions required are:

@multitable @columnfractions .02 .15 .77
@item @tab library
@tab This is the name of your library, without the @file{lib} prefix.
The AutoOpts library is named @file{libopts.so...}, so the @code{library}
attribute would have the value @code{opts}.
@item
@item @tab header
@tab Generally, using a library with a compiled program entails
@code{#include}-ing a header file.  Name that header with this attribute.
In the case of AutoOpts, it is generated and will vary based on the
name of the option definition file.  Consequently, @file{your-opts.h} is
specified.
@end multitable

@noindent
The @code{export_func} definition should contain the following attributes:

@multitable @columnfractions .02 .15 .77
@item @tab name
@tab The name of the procedure the library user may call.
@item @tab what
@tab A brief sentence describing what the procedure does.
@item @tab doc
@tab A detailed description of what the procedure does.
It may ramble on for as long as necessary to properly describe it.
@item @tab err
@tab A short description of how errors are handled.
@item @tab ret_type
@tab The data type returned by the procedure.
Omit this for @code{void} procedures.
@item @tab ret_desc
@tab Describe what the returned value is, if needed.
@item @tab private
@tab If specified, the function will @strong{not} be documented.
This is used, for example, to produce external declarations for functions
that are not available for public use, but are used in the generated text.
@item
@item @tab arg
@tab This is a compound attribute that contains:
@end multitable
@multitable @columnfractions .02 .15 .15 .62
@item @tab @tab arg_type
@tab The data type of the argument.
@item @tab @tab arg_name
@tab A short name for it.
@item @tab @tab arg_desc
@tab A brief description.
@end multitable

@noindent
As a @file{getdefs} comment, this would appear something like this:

@example
/*=--subblock=arg=arg_type,arg_name,arg_desc =*/
/*=*
 * library: opts
 * header:  your-opts.h
=*/
/*=export_func optionProcess
 *
 * what: this is the main option processing routine
 * arg:  + tOptions* + pOpts + program options descriptor +
 * arg:  + int       + argc  + program arg count  +
 * arg:  + char**    + argv  + program arg vector +
 * ret_type:  int
 * ret_desc:  the count of the arguments processed
 *
 * doc:  This is what it does.
 * err:  When it can't, it does this.
=*/
@end example

@noindent
Note the @code{subblock} and @code{library} comments.
@code{subblock} is an embedded @file{getdefs}
option (@pxref{getdefs subblock}) that tells it how to parse the
@code{arg} attribute.  The @code{library} and @code{header} entries
are global definitions that apply to all the documented functions.

@c === SECTION MARKER

@node getopt_long
@section Using getopt(3C)
@cindex getopt_long

There is a template named, @code{getopt.tpl} that is distributed with
AutoOpts.  Using that template instead of @code{options.tpl} will produce
completely independent source code that will parse command line options.  It
will utilize either the standard @code{getopt(3C)} or the GNU
@code{getopt_long(3GNU)} function to drive the parsing.  Which is used is
selected by the presence or absence of the @code{long-opts} program attribute.
It will save you from being dependent upon the @code{libopts} library @i{and}
it produces code ready for internationalization.  However, it also carries
with it some limitations on the use of AutoOpts features and some requirements
on the build environment.


@menu
* getopt limitations::  getopt feature limitations
* getopt building::     getopt build requirements
@end menu

@node getopt limitations
@subsection getopt feature limitations

This list of limitations is relative to the full list of AutoOpts
supported features, @xref{Features}.

@enumerate
@item
You cannot automatically take advantage of environment variable options or
automated parsing of configuration files (``rc'' or ``ini'' files).
Consequently, the resulting code does not support @file{--load-opts} or
@file{--save-opts} options automatically.

@item
You cannot use set membership, enumerated, range checked or stacked
argument type options.  In fact, you cannot use anything that depends
upon the @code{libopts} library.  You are constrained to options that
take ``@code{string}'' arguments, though you may handle the option
argument with a callback procedure.

@item
Special disablement and/or enablement prefixes are not recognized.

@item
Generated @code{main()} procedures will not work.

@item
Option coordination with external libraries will not work.

@item
Every option must be ``settable'' because the emitted code
depends upon the @code{SET_OPT_XXX} macros having been defined.
Specify this as a global (program) attribute.

@item
You must specify a main procedure of type ``main''.  The
@file{getopt.tpl} template depends upon being able to compile the
traditional .c file into a program and get it to emit the usage text.

@item
For the same reason, the traditional option parsing table code must be
emitted @b{before} the @file{getopt.tpl} template gets expanded.

@item
The usage text is, therefore, statically defined.
@end enumerate

@node getopt building
@subsection getopt build requirements

You must supply some compile and link options via environment variables.

@table @samp
@item srcdir
In case the option definition file lives in a different directory.
@item CFLAGS
Any special flags required to compile.  The flags from
@code{autoopts-config cflags} will be included automatically.  Since
the creation of the option parsing code includes creating a program
that prints out help text, if it is necessary to include files from
various directories to compile that program, you will need to specify
those directories with ``-Idirpath'' text in the @code{CFLAGS}.
Some experimentation may be necessary in that case.

@strong{NOTE}: the ``-Idirpath'' text is only needed if your option callback
functions include code that require additional ``#include'' directives.
@item LDFLAGS
Any special flags required to link.  The flags from
@code{autoopts-config ldflags} will be included automatically.  This
is required only if additional link flags for the help text emission
program might be needed.
@item CC
This is needed only if ``@code{cc}'' cannot be found in @code{$PATH}
(or it is not the one you want).
@end table

To use this, set the exported environment variables and specify ``getopt'' as
the default template in your option definitions file (@pxref{Identification}).
You will have @i{four} new files.  Assuming your definitions were in a file
named @file{myprog-opts.def} and your program name was specified as
@file{progname}, the resulting files would be created: @file{myprog-opts.h},
@file{myprog-opts.c}, @file{getopt-progname.h} and @file{getopt-progname.c}.
You must compile and link both @file{.c} files into your program.  If there
are link failures, then you are using AutoOpts features that require the
@file{libopts} library.  You must remove these features,
@xref{getopt limitations}.

These generated files depend upon configure defines to work correctly.
Therefore, you must specify a @code{config-header} attribute
(@pxref{programming attributes}) and ensure it has @code{#defines} for
either @code{HAVE_STDINT_H} or @code{HAVE_INTTYPES_H}; either
@code{HAVE_SYS_LIMITS_H} or @code{HAVE_LIMITS_H}; and
@code{HAVE_SYSEXITS_H}, if the @file{sysexits.h} header is available.
The required header files for these defines are, respectively,
the @file{/usr/include} files named:
@itemize @bullet
@item stdint.h
@item inttypes.h
@item sys/limits.h
@item limits.h
@item sysexits.h
@end itemize

@noindent
The following header files must also exist on the build platform:
@itemize @bullet
@item sys/types.h
@item stdio.h
@item string.h
@item unistd.h -- or, for getopt_long:
@item getopt.h
@end itemize
@c === SECTION MARKER

@node i18n
@section Internationalizing AutoOpts
@cindex Internationalizing AutoOpts

The generated code for AutoOpts will enable and disable the translation of
AutoOpts run time messages.  If @code{ENABLE_NLS} is defined at compile time,
then the @code{_()} macro may be used to specify a translation function.  If
undefined, it will default to @code{gettext(3GNU)}.  This define will also
enable a callback function that @code{optionProcess} invokes at the
beginning of option processing.  The AutoOpts @code{libopts} library will
always check for this ``compiled with NLS'' flag, so @code{libopts} does not
need to be specially compiled.  The strings returned by the translation
function will be @code{strdup(3)-ed} and kept.  They will not be
re-translated, even if the locale changes, but they will also not be dependent
upon reused or unmappable memory.

To internationalize option processing, you should first internationalize your
program.  Then, the option processing strings can be added to your translation
text by processing the AutoOpts-generated @file{my-opts.c} file and adding the
distributed @file{po/usage-txt.pot} file.  (Also by extracting the strings
yourself from the @file{usage-txt.h} file.)  When you call
@code{optionProcess}, all of the user visible AutoOpts strings will be passed
through the localization procedure established with the @code{_()}
preprocessing macro.

@c === SECTION MARKER

@node Naming Conflicts
@section Naming Conflicts
@cindex Naming Conflicts

AutoOpts generates a header file that contains many C preprocessing macros and
several external names.  For the most part, they begin with either @code{opt_}
or @code{option}, or else they end with @code{_opt}.  If this happens to
conflict with other macros you are using, or if you are compiling multiple
option sets in the same compilation unit, the conflicts can be avoided.  You
may specify an external name @code{prefix} (@pxref{program attributes}) for
all of the names generated for each set of option definitions.

Among these macros, several take an option name as a macro argument.
Sometimes, this will inconveniently conflict.  For example, if you specify an
option named, @code{debug}, the emitted code will presume that @code{DEBUG} is
not a preprocessing name.  Or also, if you are building on a Windows platform,
you may find that MicroSoft has usurped a number of user space names in its
header files.  Consequently, you will get a preprocessing error if you use,
for example, @code{HAVE_OPT(DEBUG)} or @code{HAVE_OPT(INTERNAL)}
(@pxref{HAVE_OPT}) in your code.  You may trigger an obvious warning for such
conflicts by specifying the @code{guard-option-names} attribute
(@pxref{program attributes}).  That emitted code will also @code{#undef}-ine
the conflicting name.

@node All Attribute Names
@section All Attribute Names

This is the list of all the option attributes used in the various
option processing templates.  There are several flavors of attributes,
and these are not distinguished here.

@itemize @bullet
@item
Valid, current attributes that you are encouraged to use.
@item
Internally generated attributes that you cannot use at all.
I need to prefix these with a distinguished prefix.  e.g.  ``ao-''
@item
Valid attributes, but are deprecated.  Alternates should be documented.
@end itemize

This list is derived by running many example option definitions through the
option generation and man page templates and noting which attributes are
actually used.  There may be a few that are used but not exercised in my
testing.  If so, I need to ferret those out and test them, too.

@example
aliases          allow-errors  arg-default
arg-optional     arg-range     arg-type
argument         call-proc     code
config-header    copyright     default
deprecated       descrip       detail
disable          documentation eaddr
enable           enabled       environrc
equivalence      exit-name     explain
export           extract-code  field
file-fail-code   flag          flag-code
flag-proc        flags-cant    flags-must
full-usage       gnu-usage     guard-option-names
help-value       homerc        ifdef
ifndef           immed-disable immediate
include          lib-name      library
long-opts        main          main-text
main-type        max           min
more-help-value  must-set      name
no-command       no-libopts    no-misuse-usage
no-preset        no-xlate      nomem-fail-code
omitted-usage    package       prefix
prefix-enum      preserve-case prog-name
prog-title       reorder-args  resettable
scaled           settable      short-usage
stack-arg        std-value     test-main
translators      unstack-arg   usage
usage-message    usage-opt     usage-type
val-name         val-upname    value
version
@end example

@node Option Define Names
@section Option Definition Name Index
@printindex vr

@ignore
END   == AUTOINFO == DO NOT CHANGE THIS COMMENT or the surrounding 'ignore's
Extraction from autogen.texi
@end ignore
@page
@node Add-Ons
@chapter Add-on packages for AutoGen

This chapter includes several programs that either work closely
with AutoGen (extracting definitions or providing special formatting
functions), or leverage off of AutoGen technology.  There is also
a formatting library that helps make AutoGen possible.

AutoOpts ought to appear in this list as well, but since it is
the primary reason why many people would even look into AutoGen
at all, I decided to leave it in the list of chapters.

@menu
* AutoFSM::                        Automated Finite State Machine
* AutoXDR::                        Combined RPC Marshalling
* AutoEvents::                     Automated Event Management
* columns Invocation::             Invoking columns
* getdefs Invocation::             Invoking getdefs
* xml2ag Invocation::              Invoking xml2ag
* snprintfv::   The extensible format printing library.
@end menu
@ignore
START == AUTOFSM == DO NOT CHANGE THIS COMMENT or the surrounding 'ignore's
Extraction from autogen.texi
@end ignore

@c === SECTION MARKER

@node AutoFSM
@section Automated Finite State Machine
@cindex AutoFSM
@cindex finite state machine

The templates to generate a finite state machine in C or C++ is included
with AutoGen.  The documentation is not.  The documentation is in HTML
format for @uref{http://www.gnu.org/software/autogen/autofsm.html,viewing},
or you can @uref{http://download.sourceforge.net/autogen/,download FSM}.

@node AutoXDR
@section Combined RPC Marshalling
@cindex RPC
@cindex rpcgen
@cindex remote procedure call
@cindex AutoXDR
@cindex XDR

The templates and NFSv4 definitions are not included with AutoGen in any way.
The folks that designed NFSv4 noticed that much time and bandwidth was
wasted sending queries and responses when many of them could be bundled.
The protocol bundles the data, but there is no support for it in rpcgen.
That means you have to write your own code to do that.  Until now.
Download this and you will have a large, complex example of how to use
@code{AutoXDR} for generating the marshaling and unmarshaling of combined
RPC calls.  There is a brief example
@uref{http://www.gnu.org/software/autogen/xdr/index.html,on the web}, but
you should @uref{http://download.sourceforge.net/autogen/,download AutoXDR}.

@c === SECTION MARKER

@node AutoEvents
@section Automated Event Management
@cindex AutoEvents

Large software development projects invariably have a need to manage
the distribution and display of state information and state changes.
In other words, they need to manage their software events.  Generally,
each such project invents its own way of accomplishing this and then
struggles to get all of its components to play the same way.  It is a
difficult process and not always completely successful.  This project
helps with that.

AutoEvents completely separates the tasks of supplying the data
needed for a particular event from the methods used to manage the
distribution and display of that event.  Consequently, the programmer
writing the code no longer has to worry about that part of the
problem.  Likewise the persons responsible for designing the event
management and distribution no longer have to worry about getting
programmers to write conforming code.

This is a work in progress.  See my
@uref{http://www.gnu.org/software/autogen/autoevents.html,web page}
on the subject, if you are interested.
I have some useful things put together, but it is not ready
to call a product.

@ignore
END   == AUTOFSM == DO NOT CHANGE THIS COMMENT or the surrounding 'ignore's
Extraction from autogen.texi
@end ignore
@page
@ignore
* * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * *
@end ignore
@include invoke-columns.texi

@page
@ignore
* * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * *
@end ignore
@include invoke-getdefs.texi

@page
@ignore
* * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * *
@end ignore
@include invoke-xml2ag.texi

@page
@ignore
* * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * *
@end ignore
@include invoke-snprintfv.texi
@ignore
START == FUTURE == DO NOT CHANGE THIS COMMENT or the surrounding 'ignore's
Extraction from autogen.texi
@end ignore
@ignore
END   == FUTURE == DO NOT CHANGE THIS COMMENT or the surrounding 'ignore's
Extraction from autogen.texi
@end ignore
@page
@node Future
@chapter Some ideas for the future.
@cindex futures

Here are some things that might happen in the distant future.

@itemize @bullet
@item
Fix up current tools that contain
miserably complex perl, shell, sed, awk and m4 scripts
to instead use this tool.
@end itemize
@node Copying This Manual
@appendix Copying This Manual

You may copy this manual under the terms of the FDL
(@url{http://gnu.org/licenses/fdl.texi,the GNU Free Documentation License}).


@cindex FDL, GNU Free Documentation License
@center Version 1.2, November 2002

@display
Copyright @copyright{} 2000,2001,2002 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
51 Franklin St, Fifth Floor, Boston, MA  02110-1301, USA

Everyone is permitted to copy and distribute verbatim copies
of this license document, but changing it is not allowed.
@end display

@enumerate 0
@item
PREAMBLE

The purpose of this License is to make a manual, textbook, or other
functional and useful document @dfn{free} in the sense of freedom: to
assure everyone the effective freedom to copy and redistribute it,
with or without modifying it, either commercially or noncommercially.
Secondarily, this License preserves for the author and publisher a way
to get credit for their work, while not being considered responsible
for modifications made by others.

This License is a kind of ``copyleft'', which means that derivative
works of the document must themselves be free in the same sense.  It
complements the GNU General Public License, which is a copyleft
license designed for free software.

We have designed this License in order to use it for manuals for free
software, because free software needs free documentation: a free
program should come with manuals providing the same freedoms that the
software does.  But this License is not limited to software manuals;
it can be used for any textual work, regardless of subject matter or
whether it is published as a printed book.  We recommend this License
principally for works whose purpose is instruction or reference.

@item
APPLICABILITY AND DEFINITIONS

This License applies to any manual or other work, in any medium, that
contains a notice placed by the copyright holder saying it can be
distributed under the terms of this License.  Such a notice grants a
world-wide, royalty-free license, unlimited in duration, to use that
work under the conditions stated herein.  The ``Document'', below,
refers to any such manual or work.  Any member of the public is a
licensee, and is addressed as ``you''.  You accept the license if you
copy, modify or distribute the work in a way requiring permission
under copyright law.

A ``Modified Version'' of the Document means any work containing the
Document or a portion of it, either copied verbatim, or with
modifications and/or translated into another language.

A ``Secondary Section'' is a named appendix or a front-matter section
of the Document that deals exclusively with the relationship of the
publishers or authors of the Document to the Document's overall
subject (or to related matters) and contains nothing that could fall
directly within that overall subject.  (Thus, if the Document is in
part a textbook of mathematics, a Secondary Section may not explain
any mathematics.)  The relationship could be a matter of historical
connection with the subject or with related matters, or of legal,
commercial, philosophical, ethical or political position regarding
them.

The ``Invariant Sections'' are certain Secondary Sections whose titles
are designated, as being those of Invariant Sections, in the notice
that says that the Document is released under this License.  If a
section does not fit the above definition of Secondary then it is not
allowed to be designated as Invariant.  The Document may contain zero
Invariant Sections.  If the Document does not identify any Invariant
Sections then there are none.

The ``Cover Texts'' are certain short passages of text that are listed,
as Front-Cover Texts or Back-Cover Texts, in the notice that says that
the Document is released under this License.  A Front-Cover Text may
be at most 5 words, and a Back-Cover Text may be at most 25 words.

A ``Transparent'' copy of the Document means a machine-readable copy,
represented in a format whose specification is available to the
general public, that is suitable for revising the document
straightforwardly with generic text editors or (for images composed of
pixels) generic paint programs or (for drawings) some widely available
drawing editor, and that is suitable for input to text formatters or
for automatic translation to a variety of formats suitable for input
to text formatters.  A copy made in an otherwise Transparent file
format whose markup, or absence of markup, has been arranged to thwart
or discourage subsequent modification by readers is not Transparent.
An image format is not Transparent if used for any substantial amount
of text.  A copy that is not ``Transparent'' is called ``Opaque''.

Examples of suitable formats for Transparent copies include plain
@sc{ascii} without markup, Texinfo input format, La@TeX{} input
format, @acronym{SGML} or @acronym{XML} using a publicly available
@acronym{DTD}, and standard-conforming simple @acronym{HTML},
PostScript or @acronym{PDF} designed for human modification.  Examples
of transparent image formats include @acronym{PNG}, @acronym{XCF} and
@acronym{JPG}.  Opaque formats include proprietary formats that can be
read and edited only by proprietary word processors, @acronym{SGML} or
@acronym{XML} for which the @acronym{DTD} and/or processing tools are
not generally available, and the machine-generated @acronym{HTML},
PostScript or @acronym{PDF} produced by some word processors for
output purposes only.

The ``Title Page'' means, for a printed book, the title page itself,
plus such following pages as are needed to hold, legibly, the material
this License requires to appear in the title page.  For works in
formats which do not have any title page as such, ``Title Page'' means
the text near the most prominent appearance of the work's title,
preceding the beginning of the body of the text.

A section ``Entitled XYZ'' means a named subunit of the Document whose
title either is precisely XYZ or contains XYZ in parentheses following
text that translates XYZ in another language.  (Here XYZ stands for a
specific section name mentioned below, such as ``Acknowledgements'',
``Dedications'', ``Endorsements'', or ``History''.)  To ``Preserve the Title''
of such a section when you modify the Document means that it remains a
section ``Entitled XYZ'' according to this definition.

The Document may include Warranty Disclaimers next to the notice which
states that this License applies to the Document.  These Warranty
Disclaimers are considered to be included by reference in this
License, but only as regards disclaiming warranties: any other
implication that these Warranty Disclaimers may have is void and has
no effect on the meaning of this License.

@item
VERBATIM COPYING

You may copy and distribute the Document in any medium, either
commercially or noncommercially, provided that this License, the
copyright notices, and the license notice saying this License applies
to the Document are reproduced in all copies, and that you add no other
conditions whatsoever to those of this License.  You may not use
technical measures to obstruct or control the reading or further
copying of the copies you make or distribute.  However, you may accept
compensation in exchange for copies.  If you distribute a large enough
number of copies you must also follow the conditions in section 3.

You may also lend copies, under the same conditions stated above, and
you may publicly display copies.

@item
COPYING IN QUANTITY

If you publish printed copies (or copies in media that commonly have
printed covers) of the Document, numbering more than 100, and the
Document's license notice requires Cover Texts, you must enclose the
copies in covers that carry, clearly and legibly, all these Cover
Texts: Front-Cover Texts on the front cover, and Back-Cover Texts on
the back cover.  Both covers must also clearly and legibly identify
you as the publisher of these copies.  The front cover must present
the full title with all words of the title equally prominent and
visible.  You may add other material on the covers in addition.
Copying with changes limited to the covers, as long as they preserve
the title of the Document and satisfy these conditions, can be treated
as verbatim copying in other respects.

If the required texts for either cover are too voluminous to fit
legibly, you should put the first ones listed (as many as fit
reasonably) on the actual cover, and continue the rest onto adjacent
pages.

If you publish or distribute Opaque copies of the Document numbering
more than 100, you must either include a machine-readable Transparent
copy along with each Opaque copy, or state in or with each Opaque copy
a computer-network location from which the general network-using
public has access to download using public-standard network protocols
a complete Transparent copy of the Document, free of added material.
If you use the latter option, you must take reasonably prudent steps,
when you begin distribution of Opaque copies in quantity, to ensure
that this Transparent copy will remain thus accessible at the stated
location until at least one year after the last time you distribute an
Opaque copy (directly or through your agents or retailers) of that
edition to the public.

It is requested, but not required, that you contact the authors of the
Document well before redistributing any large number of copies, to give
them a chance to provide you with an updated version of the Document.

@item
MODIFICATIONS

You may copy and distribute a Modified Version of the Document under
the conditions of sections 2 and 3 above, provided that you release
the Modified Version under precisely this License, with the Modified
Version filling the role of the Document, thus licensing distribution
and modification of the Modified Version to whoever possesses a copy
of it.  In addition, you must do these things in the Modified Version:

@enumerate A
@item
Use in the Title Page (and on the covers, if any) a title distinct
from that of the Document, and from those of previous versions
(which should, if there were any, be listed in the History section
of the Document).  You may use the same title as a previous version
if the original publisher of that version gives permission.

@item
List on the Title Page, as authors, one or more persons or entities
responsible for authorship of the modifications in the Modified
Version, together with at least five of the principal authors of the
Document (all of its principal authors, if it has fewer than five),
unless they release you from this requirement.

@item
State on the Title page the name of the publisher of the
Modified Version, as the publisher.

@item
Preserve all the copyright notices of the Document.

@item
Add an appropriate copyright notice for your modifications
adjacent to the other copyright notices.

@item
Include, immediately after the copyright notices, a license notice
giving the public permission to use the Modified Version under the
terms of this License, in the form shown in the Addendum below.

@item
Preserve in that license notice the full lists of Invariant Sections
and required Cover Texts given in the Document's license notice.

@item
Include an unaltered copy of this License.

@item
Preserve the section Entitled ``History'', Preserve its Title, and add
to it an item stating at least the title, year, new authors, and
publisher of the Modified Version as given on the Title Page.  If
there is no section Entitled ``History'' in the Document, create one
stating the title, year, authors, and publisher of the Document as
given on its Title Page, then add an item describing the Modified
Version as stated in the previous sentence.

@item
Preserve the network location, if any, given in the Document for
public access to a Transparent copy of the Document, and likewise
the network locations given in the Document for previous versions
it was based on.  These may be placed in the ``History'' section.
You may omit a network location for a work that was published at
least four years before the Document itself, or if the original
publisher of the version it refers to gives permission.

@item
For any section Entitled ``Acknowledgements'' or ``Dedications'', Preserve
the Title of the section, and preserve in the section all the
substance and tone of each of the contributor acknowledgements and/or
dedications given therein.

@item
Preserve all the Invariant Sections of the Document,
unaltered in their text and in their titles.  Section numbers
or the equivalent are not considered part of the section titles.

@item
Delete any section Entitled ``Endorsements''.  Such a section
may not be included in the Modified Version.

@item
Do not retitle any existing section to be Entitled ``Endorsements'' or
to conflict in title with any Invariant Section.

@item
Preserve any Warranty Disclaimers.
@end enumerate

If the Modified Version includes new front-matter sections or
appendices that qualify as Secondary Sections and contain no material
copied from the Document, you may at your option designate some or all
of these sections as invariant.  To do this, add their titles to the
list of Invariant Sections in the Modified Version's license notice.
These titles must be distinct from any other section titles.

You may add a section Entitled ``Endorsements'', provided it contains
nothing but endorsements of your Modified Version by various
parties---for example, statements of peer review or that the text has
been approved by an organization as the authoritative definition of a
standard.

You may add a passage of up to five words as a Front-Cover Text, and a
passage of up to 25 words as a Back-Cover Text, to the end of the list
of Cover Texts in the Modified Version.  Only one passage of
Front-Cover Text and one of Back-Cover Text may be added by (or
through arrangements made by) any one entity.  If the Document already
includes a cover text for the same cover, previously added by you or
by arrangement made by the same entity you are acting on behalf of,
you may not add another; but you may replace the old one, on explicit
permission from the previous publisher that added the old one.

The author(s) and publisher(s) of the Document do not by this License
give permission to use their names for publicity for or to assert or
imply endorsement of any Modified Version.

@item
COMBINING DOCUMENTS

You may combine the Document with other documents released under this
License, under the terms defined in section 4 above for modified
versions, provided that you include in the combination all of the
Invariant Sections of all of the original documents, unmodified, and
list them all as Invariant Sections of your combined work in its
license notice, and that you preserve all their Warranty Disclaimers.

The combined work need only contain one copy of this License, and
multiple identical Invariant Sections may be replaced with a single
copy.  If there are multiple Invariant Sections with the same name but
different contents, make the title of each such section unique by
adding at the end of it, in parentheses, the name of the original
author or publisher of that section if known, or else a unique number.
Make the same adjustment to the section titles in the list of
Invariant Sections in the license notice of the combined work.

In the combination, you must combine any sections Entitled ``History''
in the various original documents, forming one section Entitled
``History''; likewise combine any sections Entitled ``Acknowledgements'',
and any sections Entitled ``Dedications''.  You must delete all
sections Entitled ``Endorsements.''

@item
COLLECTIONS OF DOCUMENTS

You may make a collection consisting of the Document and other documents
released under this License, and replace the individual copies of this
License in the various documents with a single copy that is included in
the collection, provided that you follow the rules of this License for
verbatim copying of each of the documents in all other respects.

You may extract a single document from such a collection, and distribute
it individually under this License, provided you insert a copy of this
License into the extracted document, and follow this License in all
other respects regarding verbatim copying of that document.

@item
AGGREGATION WITH INDEPENDENT WORKS

A compilation of the Document or its derivatives with other separate
and independent documents or works, in or on a volume of a storage or
distribution medium, is called an ``aggregate'' if the copyright
resulting from the compilation is not used to limit the legal rights
of the compilation's users beyond what the individual works permit.
When the Document is included in an aggregate, this License does not
apply to the other works in the aggregate which are not themselves
derivative works of the Document.

If the Cover Text requirement of section 3 is applicable to these
copies of the Document, then if the Document is less than one half of
the entire aggregate, the Document's Cover Texts may be placed on
covers that bracket the Document within the aggregate, or the
electronic equivalent of covers if the Document is in electronic form.
Otherwise they must appear on printed covers that bracket the whole
aggregate.

@item
TRANSLATION

Translation is considered a kind of modification, so you may
distribute translations of the Document under the terms of section 4.
Replacing Invariant Sections with translations requires special
permission from their copyright holders, but you may include
translations of some or all Invariant Sections in addition to the
original versions of these Invariant Sections.  You may include a
translation of this License, and all the license notices in the
Document, and any Warranty Disclaimers, provided that you also include
the original English version of this License and the original versions
of those notices and disclaimers.  In case of a disagreement between
the translation and the original version of this License or a notice
or disclaimer, the original version will prevail.

If a section in the Document is Entitled ``Acknowledgements'',
``Dedications'', or ``History'', the requirement (section 4) to Preserve
its Title (section 1) will typically require changing the actual
title.

@item
TERMINATION

You may not copy, modify, sublicense, or distribute the Document except
as expressly provided for under this License.  Any other attempt to
copy, modify, sublicense or distribute the Document is void, and will
automatically terminate your rights under this License.  However,
parties who have received copies, or rights, from you under this
License will not have their licenses terminated so long as such
parties remain in full compliance.

@item
FUTURE REVISIONS OF THIS LICENSE

The Free Software Foundation may publish new, revised versions
of the GNU Free Documentation License from time to time.  Such new
versions will be similar in spirit to the present version, but may
differ in detail to address new problems or concerns.  See
@uref{http://www.gnu.org/copyleft/}.

Each version of the License is given a distinguishing version number.
If the Document specifies that a particular numbered version of this
License ``or any later version'' applies to it, you have the option of
following the terms and conditions either of that specified version or
of any later version that has been published (not as a draft) by the
Free Software Foundation.  If the Document does not specify a version
number of this License, you may choose any version ever published (not
as a draft) by the Free Software Foundation.
@end enumerate

@page
@heading ADDENDUM: How to use this License for your documents

To use this License in a document you have written, include a copy of
the License in the document and put the following copyright and
license notices just after the title page:

@smallexample
@group
  copyright (c) 1992-2012 by Bruce Korb - all rights reserved
  Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
  under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.2
  or any later version published by the Free Software Foundation;
  with no Invariant Sections, no Front-Cover Texts, and no Back-Cover
  Texts.  A copy of the license is included in the section entitled ``GNU
  Free Documentation License''.
@end group
@end smallexample

If you have Invariant Sections, Front-Cover Texts and Back-Cover Texts,
replace the ``with...Texts.'' line with this:

@smallexample
@group
    with the Invariant Sections being @var{list their titles}, with
    the Front-Cover Texts being @var{list}, and with the Back-Cover Texts
    being @var{list}.
@end group
@end smallexample

If you have Invariant Sections without Cover Texts, or some other
combination of the three, merge those two alternatives to suit the
situation.

If your document contains nontrivial examples of program code, we
recommend releasing these examples in parallel under your choice of
free software license, such as the GNU General Public License,
to permit their use in free software.

@c Local Variables:
@c ispell-local-pdict: "ispell-dict"
@c End:

@page
@node Concept Index
@unnumbered Concept Index

@printindex cp
@page
@node Function Index
@unnumbered Function Index

@printindex fn
@page
@contents
@bye

